 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 7, 2016
TV & RADIO
FRA Studying Ways to Cut Down Train Travel along Northeast Corridor	2
Train Conductor Sues Amtrak	2
VA Residents Shares Thoughts on Richmond High Speed Rail	2
Train Derails in New Orleans East	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Bloomberg Business - U.S. Rail Stocks Seen Up 20% This Year Even as Cargo Stays Weak	2
STATE BY STATE
Associated Press - Long-Sought Overhaul at US' Busiest Train Station Restarted	4
Politico New York - Cuomo vows to finally fix, and rebrand, Penn Station	5
The New York Times - Cuomo Lays Out Renovation Plan for Penn Station and Farley Post Office	7
Associated Press – Freight rail traffic declined 2.5 percent last year	9
Railway Technology – Solving Chicago’s rail gridlock	10
Greenwich Time – Sen. Blumenthal in Danbury to discuss safety at railroad service company	13
PTC
The Buffalo News – Editorial: Delay in installation of speed controls leaves railroads vulnerable to accidents	14
RAIL INCIDENTS
WDSU (LA) - NOFD investigates train derailment in New Orleans East	15
HUDSON TUNNEL
NorthJersey.com - New Hudson rail tunnel project would dwarf initial plan	15
HIGH SPEED RAIL
The Hill - California unveils bids for high-speed rail construction	18
AMTRAK
WTVM (GA) - Southern Rail Commission releases Amtrak study of feasibility for return to Mobile	19
E&E Publishing - Amtrak must improve financial planning for Northeast -- GAO	21


TV & RADIO
Home
FRA Studying Ways to Cut Down Train Travel along Northeast Corridor
WAMU-FM (Radio) - Washington, D.C

Train Conductor Sues Amtrak
Pittsburgh Cable News Channel - Pittsburgh, PA

VA Residents Shares Thoughts on Richmond High Speed Rail
WRLH-RIC (FOX) - Richmond, VA

Train Derails in New Orleans East
WWL-NO (CBS) - New Orleans, LA

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Bloomberg Business - U.S. Rail Stocks Seen Up 20% This Year Even as Cargo Stays Weak
January 6, 2016
Thomas Black

U.S. railroad cargo in 2015 dropped the most in six years, and 2016 isn’t expected to be any better. Yet the carriers’ shares are poised for a rebound from their worst performance in at least 25 years.

Union Pacific Corp., CSX Corp. and Kansas City Southern each are expected to rise more than 20 percent this year, according to the average of analysts’ target prices compiled by Bloomberg. Norfolk Southern Corp. trails the field with an expected 11 percent return but that’s largely because its stock already was boosted by a takeover campaign from Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. that began in November.

Cheap valuations coupled by railroads’ efforts to boost freight prices and improve efficiency will drive stock prices. Carloads fell 2.5 percent in 2015, the Association of American Railroads reported Wednesday. It was the biggest drop since 2009.

“The near-term setup is reasonably favorable for the stocks because sentiment is low,” said Benjamin Hartford, an analyst at Robert W. Baird & Co. “Volumes continue to be weak, but that’s embedded in investor expectations.” The Standard & Poor’s Railroads Index fell Wednesday after the release of the cargo data and amid a broad market retreat.

Railroads responded to last year’s freight decline by parking locomotives and cutting workers. Train speeds have steadily risen, partly because of less congestion, making the rails more efficient. Union Pacific, the largest publicly traded railroad, is expected to post a 7 percent gain in earnings per share this year, according to analysts’ estimates compiled by Bloomberg. Norfolk Southern is predicted to report a 9 percent increase.

The S&P railroads index plummeted 32 percent last year, only the fourth time in 15 years that the industry has trailed the broader market. The S&P 500 Index dropped 0.7 percent last year. That’s made railroads cheap.

The average price for the largest U.S. railroads fell to 14.5 times earnings in 2015 from 20.2 the previous year, while the S&P 500 Index’s price-earnings ratio stayed at 18.3. Last year was the first time since 2008 that the railroads’ ratio trailed the index’s.

Carloads of coal, crude oil and metals plummeted and don’t show signs of recovery this year. Auto shipments, one of the few bright spots, have little room to grow after record-breaking car sales last year.

“For those who expect last year was an aberration and there’s going to be a return to normalcy, they’re going to be disappointed,” said Larry Gross, a partner at FTR Transportation Intelligence.

The decline in rail freight this year puts pressure on the carriers to increase prices and improve efficiency, said John Larkin, an analyst at Stifel Nicolaus & Co.

“People would jump for joy if we could get to flat” carload growth, he said. “More realistically, you’re probably down 2 to 5 percent.” Sales are expected to increase 2 percent at Union Pacific this year and 1 percent at Norfolk Southern, according to analysts’ estimates compiled by Bloomberg.

Merger Strategy

While companies in other industries have acquired competitors to offset slow growth, U.S. regulators have made it difficult for railroads to merge after a flurry of combinations left only seven large carriers in the U.S. and Canada. Canadian Pacific wants to purchase Norfolk Southern in part because about 56 percent of the U.S. railroad’s traffic is intermodal, that is, hauling containers that are consumer-related, said Lee Klaskow, an analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence. Only 41 percent of the Canadian carrier’s freight is intermodal.

“CP is going after NS because CP is a commodity railroad,” he said. “Right now, its mix is at a disadvantage to someone that is more geared to the consumer.”

Norfolk Southern last month rebuffed a sweetened $27 billion cash-and-stock offer, and Canadian Pacific Chief Executive Officer Hunter Harrison has hinted that he may wage a proxy fight. Norfolk Southern called the proposal “grossly inadequate” and said regulators wouldn’t approve of the tie-up.

U.S. railroad shares could struggle to beat the S&P 500 Index if the strong dollar continues to weigh on industrial production and commodities, said Hartford, the Robert W. Baird analyst. Manufacturing last month contracted at the fastest pace in more than six years. Carloads of coal, which make up about a fifth of rail cargo, fell 12 percent last year.

“At some point in time, it becomes a game of matching very low sentiment with trends not getting any worse than expected,” he said. “That’s where we are with the rails.”

STATE BY STATE
Home
Associated Press - Long-Sought Overhaul at US' Busiest Train Station Restarted
January 6, 2016
Deepti Hajela

Calling the nation's busiest train station "dark" and "ugly," Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Wednesday announced a restart of the long sought-after overhaul of Penn Station, a project that could cost up to $3 billion and include improvements like bringing natural light into the congested maze underneath Madison Square Garden.

He said a request for proposals from developers for the Pennsylvania Station project would go out this week, with responses due in 90 days and work to get started on an expedited basis.

"Penn Station is un-New York," said Cuomo, a Democrat. "It is dark. It is constrained. It is ugly."

Penn Station, in Manhattan, handles more than 650,000 passengers daily on Amtrak, Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit lines. Plans to overhaul it, including efforts to connect it via underground passages to a massive redeveloped main post office across the street to improve passenger access, have been have been called for and talked about for years.

The post office project, turning the James A. Farley Post Office into the Moynihan Station, named for the late U.S. Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, has had developers Related Companies and Vornado Realty Trust attached to it for a decade. The Cuomo administration said that agreement had been severed but the developers could re-bid.

A Related spokeswoman applauded the governor's focus on the revitalization of Penn Station and Moynihan Station.

"The redevelopment will transform the nation's busiest train station into a modern commuter hub and a gateway befitting the greatest city in the world," spokeswoman Joanna Rose said. "We continue to passionately believe in the project and look forward to reviewing the materials."

A representative for Vornado declined to comment.

Cuomo said a number of alternatives would be considered for the Penn Station renovation, such as constructing large entrances along either of the avenues it sits between, putting new entrances at corners, or renovating the interior without changing the exterior. One of those alternatives would require moving the theater attached to the Garden.

Politico New York - Cuomo vows to finally fix, and rebrand, Penn Station
January 6, 2016
Dana Rubinstein

Sixteen years ago, then President Bill Clinton, then Governor George Pataki and then U.S. Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan said they would transform the neoclassical James A. Farley Post Office across from Madison Square Garden into a new Penn Station.

"New York can once again provide a model for the nation,” Clinton said.

Clinton left office in 2001. Moynihan died in 2003. Pataki ended his 12-year tenure as governor at the end of 2006. Clinton’s wife Hillary, back then the nation's first lady, succeeded Moynihan as senator and is now the Democratic frontrunner for president.

Meanwhile, the project long known as Moynihan Station — named for the man who started out as a shoeshine boy at the old Penn Station and ended up championing a new one — has made only the most limited of progress.

Today, everything changes, according to Gov. Andrew Cuomo, including, apparently, the project’s name, which will now be known as the Empire Station Complex.

The Moynihan name will apply only to the Farley building, which will become known as "Moynihan Train Hall" within the larger Empire State Complex.

“Today we have an opportunity, I would say even more, we have an obligation, to dream big just like our founding fathers, and then to do it, right?” said Cuomo on Wednesday afternoon, speaking to a small audience in a small theater at Madison Square Garden. “Government is not an act of rhetoric. Government is not a soap box.”

Cuomo’s new proposal is yet another effort to tap into private funding to make the hemisphere’s most heavily used, and, arguably, least attractive train station into something befitting the financial and cultural capital of the United States.

And the fact that Cuomo is trying to take action is a good thing, even if her father’s name is no longer front and center, according to Maura Moynihan, the daughter of the late senator, who was not invited to Wednesday's event.

“Honestly, I don’t care what they call it, as long as they build it,” said Moynihan, who promised her father on his death bed that she would work to get the project built. “Dad actually said when he was alive, ‘Oh, don’t put my name on it. Old Jim Farley should keep his name.’” (Farley was a legendary New York political operative who served as Franklin Roosevelt's campaign manager in 1932 and 1936, and, more to the point, was postmaster general during FDR's first two terms.)

This week, various state entitites, in coordination with Amtrak, will issue a joint solicitation to developers interested in the development rights associated with the site.

They will have 90 days to respond.

The developer’s purchase of those development rights will, in turn, help finance the long-sought conversion of the post office into a train hall for Amtrak, New Jersey Transit, and Long Island Rail Road. It would also help finance a menu of possible improvements to Penn Station itself.

That menu includes what the state described, in a powerpoint presentation, as a “a friendly, negotiated condemnation and removal of the MSG Paramount Theater,” a small theater at Madison Square Garden whose disappearance would allow for some natural light to enter Penn Station, as well as a grander entrance.

“As it advances, if there’s an opportunity to partner with the state, I will gladly take it,” said Madison Square Garden owner James Dolan.

Both Related Companies and Vornado, which in 2005 won the development rights associated with the station, are expected to rebid for the project.

“We continue to passionately believe in the project and look forward to reviewing the materials,” said Related spokeswoman Joanna Rose, in an email.

Cuomo wants “substantial construction” completed within three years.

Many details were left unanswered in Cuomo’s presentation.

During an impromptu gaggle following the event, Cuomo took only a couple questions from the press, and one of them was about homelessness.

The most-pressing question, according to transportation planners, is what, if anything, his proposal portends for Penn South, Amtrak’s planned extension of Penn Station to accommodate increased traffic from a new cross-Hudson rail tunnel.

“I don’t know,” said Regional Plan Association president Tom Wright, when asked how Cuomo’s plan fits into Amtrak’s Penn South plan. “None of us know. I think we’re all trying to figure [that] out, and my guess is they are, too.”

One thing, however, was abundantly clear. Cuomo has no intention of getting Dolan to move Madison Square Garden from its stifling position on top of Penn Station, something that many urbanists consider essential to truly improving the station below.

“There was a proposal at a time to move Madison Square Garden over to the Farley Post Office. That was short-lived and that didn’t happen,” said Cuomo, one of whose closest aides now works for Madison Square Garden.

The New York Times - Cuomo Lays Out Renovation Plan for Penn Station and Farley Post Office
January 6, 2016
Charles V. Bagli and Emma G. Fitzsimmons

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo continued laying out his vision for a modernized, statewide transportation network on Wednesday afternoon with one more ambitious project: the renovation of Pennsylvania Station, one of the busiest transit halls in the Western Hemisphere, and the creation of an adjunct train and retail hub within the walls of the blocklong general post office across Eighth Avenue.

During a news conference at Madison Square Garden in Manhattan, Mr. Cuomo called on New Yorkers to “think big” as they did in the past, with equal measures of ambition and audacity.

The announcement was one in a series of appearances by the governor centering on his plans for improving New York State’s infrastructure, which include adding a third track to part of the Long Island Rail Road’s Main Line. On Wednesday morning, in Syracuse, he proposed spending $22 billion to improve roads and bridges, largely upstate.

At Madison Square Garden, he characterized his plans, which also include new air and rail terminals, new transit stations and a Hudson River rail tunnel, as “the biggest construction program in our state’s history.”

“What happens tomorrow depends on what we do today,” Mr. Cuomo said. “Let’s be as bold and ambitious as our forefathers before us.”

The governor’s initiative in Manhattan involves projects on both sides of Eighth Avenue, between 31st and 33rd Streets, where Madison Square Garden sits atop the warren of narrow and confusing passageways in Penn Station.

Mr. Cuomo said the state, along with Amtrak and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, would solicit proposals from developers whose options would include the creation of a grand glass-walled entrance to Penn Station on Eighth Avenue.

The project could entail razing the 5,600-seat theater that sits beneath Madison Square Garden, upgrading the shops in the complex, and adding new entrances on Seventh Avenue or 33rd Street.

Developers would undertake the project, Mr. Cuomo said, in return for the rights to control all the retail shops in Penn Station.

Simultaneously, the state and its partners will solicit a developer for the long-gestating plan to turn the nearly vacant James A. Farley Post Office into a train station and a giant waiting room for Amtrak passengers, as well as shops and office space.

Developers could submit proposals for either project or both.

The announcement was a blow to two of the city’s most prominent developers — Related Companies and Vornado Realty — who the state selected 10 years ago to transform the post office building into what was to be called Moynihan Station, after Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who first championed the idea in the early 1990s.

The developers, who had sought a tenant before closing on the deal, had proposed several plans, including moving Madison Square Garden within the walls of the post office, which would have enabled them to build a glass mall and skyscrapers over and near Penn Station. But ultimately, there was no progress.

The developers had agreed to pay the state more than $200 million for the Farley building and $110 million for development rights that they planned to transfer across Eighth Avenue for a residential tower.

Late last year, the state appeared close to a deal with Related and Vornado that would have had the developers signing a contract without a tenant and paying the state. But in December the state suddenly shifted its stance, leading to Wednesday’s announcement of a new request for proposals.

“It went on too long,” Mr. Cuomo said in an interview after the announcement. “The integration of the two complexes could excite imagination.”

Vornado and Related are not out of the running. Indeed, they have a huge advantage over rival bidders, especially since the state wants developers to respond to its solicitation in 90 days. They have an intimate understanding of both Penn Station and the post office, and the complexity of building at a working train station.

Mr. Cuomo said he wanted to send a message: “We wanted people to know we’re looking for an aggressive, ambitious design. This will get done.”

Under the terms of their agreement, the state would be required to reimburse Vornado and Related for more than $30 million if they do not go forward with the post office project. Vornado is the largest property owner in the neighborhood surrounding Penn Station and has its own plans for the area.

Still, at least two other major developers — Brookfield and Extell Development — have told state officials over the past year that they would be interested in taking on the projects.

It is unclear exactly how the more than $3 billion project, which the governor is calling the Empire Station Complex, will be paid for, but Mr. Cuomo is expected to unveil a financial plan for his transportation network at next week’s State of the State speech. The governor said that $325 million would come from government sources. He also said that the request for proposals would go out to developers later this week.

Mary Rowe, executive vice president of the Municipal Art Society, a proponent of a renovated Penn Station, lauded the governor for highlighting the need for urgent and ambitious change.

“However,” she added, “these improvements won’t be enough to fully address Penn Station’s severe overcrowding or meet the growing needs of its rapidly developing neighborhood and our regional economy.”

On any given day more than 600,000 commuters and travelers — triple what the station was originally designed for — move through the underground labyrinth of Penn Station.

On Wednesday, Mr. Cuomo also announced that he wanted to freeze tolls on the Tappan Zee Bridge and the New York State Thruway until 2020. He suggested the state spend $700 million to keep tolls on the Thruway at their current level.

A $3.9 billion replacement for the Tappan Zee currently being built on the Hudson River is scheduled to open in 2018. The New York State Thruway Authority created a task force last year to make recommendations for possible toll increases on the new bridge.

Associated Press – Freight rail traffic declined 2.5 percent last year
January 6, 2016

OMAHA, Neb. (AP) — Freight railroads hauled 2.5 percent fewer carloads last year as demand for coal continued to erode and shipments of most other goods also slowed.

The numbers released by the Association of American Railroads Tuesday limited railroad profits in 2015 and forced them to cut costs.

The major railroads will begin releasing their fourth-quarter financial reports next week.

Railroads hauled just under 28 million carloads of freight in the United States last year. That was down from last year's 28.7 million carloads.

Coal shipments fell 12 percent in 2015 because of weak demand from U.S. utilities and export markets.

Crude oil shipments also fell, but the year-end numbers don't break out that commodity individually. Through September, crude oil shipments were down 10 percent.

Shipments of intermodal containers grew 1.6 percent.

Railway Technology – Solving Chicago’s rail gridlock
January 6, 2016
Eva Grey

Blighted with severe bottlenecks across its freight and passenger railway lines, Chicago has been dubbed “America’s rail traffic speed bump”. After an Amtrak investigation revealed that the city’s congestion problem could cause up to $799bn yearly losses to the US economy, what are the new solutions that could solve Chicago’s problem once and for all?

Located at the crossroads of four major Eastern and Western railroads, Chicago is the hub of the United States' passenger and freight rail networks. Carrying a third of all rail freight traffic in the US valued at over $1tn, the city is the most important freight rail hub in North America. Chicago also holds the second largest commuter rail ridership of any US city, representing 11% of total ridership. As such, almost every major North American industry is dependent on the smooth running of Chicago's rail operations.

But despite its national importance, Chicago has earned its nickname of "America's rail traffic speed bump" after its services were blighted by severe, debilitating gridlocks and delays.

Although delays reached a critical point in winter 2014, the gridlock began much earlier and is still present today. Between 2013 and 2014, six of the eight worst performing long-distance passenger routes originated and terminated in Chicago. The situation only worsened during the current fiscal year, when Chicago was the source and end point of seven of the country's worst performing trains.

As a result, on 24 October 2014 president of US passenger service operator Amtrak, Joseph Boardman, set up the Chicago Gateway Blue Ribbon Panel, a board of rail experts, attorneys, professors and former mayors tasked with identifying the critical infrastructure and operational improvements Chicago needs to relieve its rail congestion.

The panel's findings, published on 1 October 2015, revealed that if left unchecked, Chicago's rail gridlock will end up costing the US economy almost $800bn each year, due to its effects on six key industries constituting 85% of US domestic product: agriculture, natural resources, automotive, manufacturing, retail and services.

"The congestion challenge in Chicago poses the largest potential economic vulnerability to the US economy of all the major rail hubs in the United States", the panel concluded, urging immediate action in order to avoid "the next Chicago rail crisis".

Chicago's rail traffic problem has not been an ignored topic. Over the past 15 years, authorities have made efforts to address the issue, the most important of which is a yet unfinished $4bn investment programme called Chicago Region Environmental and Transportation Efficiency (CREATE).

Established in 2003, CREATE encompasses 70 different freight and passenger projects looking at improving rail line capacity. So far, only 29 of these projects have been completed or are currently under construction, at a cost of $1.2bn, while the rest have been stalled due to lack of funding.

With Chicago's volume of rail freight projected to increase by 62% before 2040, Amtrak's report lists seven key recommendations, from top-priority infrastructure investments to improved operating practices, which aim to tackle Chicago's congestion once and for all.

Infrastructural developments: tackling Chicago's biggest chokepoint

"Because of the centrality of Chicago to the national railroad system in the US, the importance of alleviating congestion and increase fluidity has national economic implications," says Howard Learner, Chicago attorney and member of the Blue Ribbon Panel.

"The CREATE programme received input and support by a wide range of democratic and republic politicians, policy makers across the board, transportation companies, labour unions, planners, environmental groups and others. One of the things the panel did here was prioritise two of the infrastructure improvements that have been highlighted in the CREATE programme."
The first top priority project highlighted in the report is the 75th Street Corridor, located south of the city, identified as "Chicago's biggest chokepoint".

On a daily basis, 90 freight trains and 30 commuter trains have to squeeze through the same crisscross of tracks on a two-mile radius, forming long waiting queues around three major chokepoints. The Panel thus identified four separate CREATE projects which should be prioritised in order to alleviate this severe congestion.

Increasing efficiency of movement

For an estimated cost of $1bn, the report suggests a complete reconfiguration of existing tracks at Belt Junction and 80th Street, the installation of additional tracks along the corridor, the construction of a flyover at Forest Hill Junction to separate the east-west and north-south lines, and a new $250m flyover for passenger trains.

Once completed, the 75th Street Projects are expected to "almost entirely eliminate the need for trains to cross over other rail lines at grade at the 75th Street Corridor's three chokepoints" and efficiency of movement will be increased by 40%.

A second key priority task identified in the report is the Grand Crossing Project, aimed to "improve or replace" three of the worst performing Amtrak routes into Chicago. Also called the CREATE Project 4, changes within this initiative would involve adding additional track capacity a two new service connections.

The Indiana Gateway Project, currently the only one under construction, is looking at adding seven miles of third track and crossovers at seven key locations across a 40-mile segment to increase fluidity.

The report highlights that all three projects could be realised for less than $1.5bn, however no additional funding has been made available for the rest of the improvements. Learner admits that although the Panel would like to see the CREATE improvements being achieved faster, "we are at a time of financial constraints".

Operational and coordination improvements at a fraction of the cost

Another set of measures looked at improving operational coordination and communication between train dispatchers. At the moment, railroad dispatchers overseeing ten different railroads are dispersed across six different cities, making real-time communication problematic.

The Panel's suggestion is simply bringing all dispatchers together in the same room.

"Those operational improvements give better coordination, can reduce congestion and increase fluidity and that's regardless of any additional infrastructure," Learner says. "Those are not especially costly. They are not zero cost, but they are not necessarily big ticket items."

According to the report, Amtrak is considering organising a co-located dispatching centre in Chicago Union Station.

Thanks to The Chicago Transportation Coordination Office (CTCO), which has been producing daily performance statistics and scorecards since its inception in 1999, coordination and operational performance has indeed seen some progress, particularly since Chicago reached its rail service tipping point in 2014. Possibly one of the simplest and cheapest recommendations on the list, the Panel urged Amtrak, commuter rail operator Metra and freight operators to keep up efforts in improving communication, with a particular focus on the most problematic nodes.

Due to its mix of infrastructural, heavy-funding projects and more cost-effective, organisational procedures, the Panel seems confident that its report will eventually help enable the much needed changes for Chicago.

A driver for action

"I think it's important to point out that instead of just producing a report and putting it on a shelf somewhere, the panel met directly with congressional staff, we've met directly with the leaders of the freight industry, and we're engaging the media nationally and internationally because this problem affects the entire North American continent," says Amtrak government affairs spokesperson Marc Magliari.

"So we will see whether the Congress in its deliberations appropriates money towards some of the infrastructure investments that were targeted," he says. "In the meantime, some of the operational improvements and better coordination can go forward without large amounts of additional funding."

At the moment, a Service Transportation bill currently being discussed between the US House of Representatives and the Senate is seen as a good opportunity to advance some of the main suggestions put forward in the report. Magliari points out that since publication, there have been "more robust discussions" about staffing of the coordination office.

"Although not as far reaching as our recommendations, some progress was made with freight railroads, commuter railroads and Amtrak railroads on better coordination and better staffing. And I don't think that's a coincidence," he says. "We believe this report will be a springboard for action that's not going to sit on the shelf."

Greenwich Time – Sen. Blumenthal in Danbury to discuss safety at railroad service company
January 6, 2016
Rob Ryser

DANBURY - Sen. Richard Blumenthal was scheduled to visit a city railroad service company Wednesday afternoon to discuss rail safety technology.

Blumenthal planned to visit Sperry Rail Service in Danbury to discuss a transportation bill that recently passed Congress that increases funding for rail safety, according to a news release.

Sperry Rail Service produces new technology that detects flaws in rails that could have helped to prevent the 2013 derailment in Bridgeport. In that crash, a Metro-North train jumped the tracks and hit an oncoming train after traveling over a broken section of rail.
In December, Congress passed a bill that includes $3.5 billion for Connecticut’s roads and rails, along with safety reforms and new initiatives to rebuild aging rail throughout New England, according to the news release.

“Sperry Rail’s technology finds internal rail defects in steel, preventing potentially catastrophic derailments,” Blumenthal said in a prepared statement. “I look forward to continuing to work with the company to ensure more robust rail safety measures and improved technology.”

PTC
Home
The Buffalo News – Editorial: Delay in installation of speed controls leaves railroads vulnerable to accidents
January 6, 2016

An agreement by Congress to give railroads more time to install what most agree is a much-needed speed control system is a mistake that could prove disastrous.

In an example where deal-making trumps good policymaking, Congress agreed to language conveniently placed in a 1,000-page transportation law signed Dec. 4. It could extend until the end of 2020 the deadline for installing a life-saving piece of technology called positive train control. The system can slow or stop trains before an accident occurs.

Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor – trains serving the Boston-New York-Philadelphia-Washington route – is heavily used thanks to its convenience and affordability. It became deadly when Northeast Regional Train No. 188 traveling from Washington to New York at 106 miles per hour entered a curve in Philadelphia where the speed limit was 55 miles per hour. The engine and seven cars derailed, killing eight and leaving dozens injured. 

Rail safety advocates insist that the positive train control system could have prevented the May crash in Philadelphia.

At the time, Amtrak had installed positive train control along much of its Northeast Corridor, but not along the stretch in Philadelphia where the accident took place. Reports said the system had been only months from being operational.

Amtrak recently announced that all of the tracks it owns between Washington and New York have the system installed and operational.

But thousands of miles of track remain unprotected. Congress continues to allow delays, favoring the railroad industry while causing anxiety for federal regulators.

The original deadline for installing the system on all freight and commuter trains was 2015, according to the New York Times, under a law passed following a 2008 commuter rail crash in California that killed 25 and injured 135.

The National Transportation Safety Board, according to the Times, says the technology could have prevented 145 rail accidents since 1969 that killed 288 people and injured 6,574. 

Industry appeals to lawmakers for more time have been successful, despite the efforts of the Obama administration, which threatened civil penalties starting at $5,000 a day, and Sens. Charles E. Schumer, D-N.Y., and Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn.

Schumer has long been an advocate for safer trains in densely populated areas of New York. Blumenthal has been a vocal critic of an extension for railroads to install positive train control. 

History supports their advocacy.

A 2013 explosion in Lac-Megantic, Quebec, claimed 47 lives when a train carrying crude oil derailed. An oil train derailed in Cheektowaga later that year, luckily with no injuries.

Most of us would rather not rely on luck. 

Rail is indispensable to the nation’s transportation and economic system. Congress should support efforts to enhance safety, not buy into potentially lethal delaying tactics.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
WDSU (LA) - NOFD investigates train derailment in New Orleans East
January 6, 2016
Kelsey Davis

NEW ORLEANS —The New Orleans Fire Department is investigating an early morning train derailment in New Orleans East.

Officials say they got a call around 5 a.m. of several cars derailed from a track inside a train yard in the 7800 block of Almonaster Boulevard.

Right now it’s unclear how many cars were derailed or what caused the derailment.

NOFD says there are no reported injuries, and so far, no concern of hazardous materials being released.

HUDSON TUNNEL
Home
NorthJersey.com - New Hudson rail tunnel project would dwarf initial plan
January 6, 2016
Paul Berger

When Governor Christie, citing potential cost overruns, scuttled an $8.9 billion tunnel project in 2010, he set in motion a string of moves by local, state and federal officials that have resulted in a proposal for a much larger, federally driven project to build new rail tunnels under the Hudson River that by some estimates could cost $20 billion.

Planning for the new tunnels, dubbed Gateway, is expected to ramp up this year as the Port Authority takes the reins of what could be the largest public works project in the nation. And it joins new efforts – such as one announced Wednesday by New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to spend $3 billion to overhaul New York Penn Station — to rebuild crumbling infrastructure in the region.

Like its predecessor, Gateway plans to deliver rail tunnels that would double the train capacity into New York City. And Gateway, like the canceled Access to the Region’s Core project, also envisions a new set of tracks that bypass Secaucus Junction, creating a one-seat ride from North Jersey into Manhattan.

But Gateway is a much broader project that also includes critical repairs to the existing train tunnels, upgrades and replacements of several bridges along Amtrak’s heavily traveled Northeast Corridor line, and miles of additional tracks between Newark and New York City.

With any luck, it should be completed in the next 20 years.

“What is now being proposed is probably |a better project and will serve the region in a broader and more constructive way,” said Ingrid Reed, a former policy analyst at Rutgers’ Eagleton Institute of Politics.

Indeed, the Access to the Region’s Core project, or ARC, was smaller in scope and more narrowly focused on improving the trip to Manhattan for NJ Transit commuters. Gateway is an Amtrak project that also focuses on travelers on the Northeast Corridor, which links Boston and Washington.

That key distinction has resulted in substantial differences in the way that the projects serve commuters from New Jersey, perhaps with the most noticeable being a new location for the end of the line.

Under Gateway, NJ Transit commuters will be deposited at a newly expanded Penn Station South between 30th and 31st streets. If ARC had survived, commuters would have arrived in New York at a new transit hub buried deep beneath 34th Street.

ARC would have offered direct access to the Sixth Avenue subway line (B, D, F, M), which commuters currently reach by walking one long block aboveground, in addition to connections NJ Transit passengers have today to the Seventh Avenue (1, 2, 3) and Eighth Avenue (A, C, E) subway lines.

Also, because the ARC hub was envisioned north and east of Penn Station, it would have shortened the walk for many midtown office workers.

“One of the reasons we went to 34th Street was because it was a better transfer to the subway and it got people further north and further east,” said Tom Schulze, a former planner for NJ Transit who was the senior director in charge of ARC. “I think that was a better project.”

However, James Greller, a transportation planner for the Hudson County Improvement Authority, said that one of the main reasons Gateway is so much better than ARC is that it includes a desperately needed expansion of Penn Station.

“The station is not really designed for the operation and volume we have today,” Greller said.

Penn Station was designed and built at the turn of the 20th century to handle about 200,000 passengers per day. Today, according to Amtrak, the station must cope with half a million people streaming in from the Long Island Rail Road, NJ Transit and Amtrak as well as the New York City subway.

If Gateway is ever built — and it remains |a huge “if” — NJ Transit trains will arrive |into a Penn South extension that will be ­|better equipped to siphon off the large volume of commuters, between 1,000 and 1,500 passengers at a time, who pile out of each of |NJ Transit’s double-decker trains in the morning.

But Penn South also promises to be considerably more costly than the ARC project’s underground hub, largely because the cost of developing an entire midtown Manhattan block is so expensive. As The Record reported in January, the land alone could cost about $1 billion.

Bridge replacement

Gateway also includes some big-ticket projects that were not included in the ARC budget, but are seen as necessary fixes to take advantage of the new tunnel capacity.

One is the replacement of the Portal Bridge over the Hackensack River, between Kearny and Secaucus, which is expected to cost about $1 billion. The bridge, known among Amtrak officials as the “Achilles’ heel of the Northeast Corridor,” is a regular source of delays when the century-old machinery fails or when, as sometimes happens, the partially wooden bridge catches fire.

Gateway also includes the cost of repairing and upgrading the existing rail tunnels under the Hudson River, which were flooded |with corrosive saltwater and chemicals in 2012 during Superstorm Sandy. Each of |the existing 105-year-old tunnels must be closed for repairs within about 20 years. |If new tunnels don’t open before then, |officials warn that train capacity into and |out of New York will be cut from 24 |trains an hour to six, causing chaos for commuters.

Although ARC’s plans included the laying of some additional railway track along the five-mile route from Secaucus into New York City, Gateway envisions a much larger-scale expansion, doubling the number of railway lines from two to four, along most of the 10-mile route from Newark into New York.

Auditors’ misgivings

One of Christie’s main arguments for killing ARC, which was budgeted at $8.9 billion, was projected cost overruns.

A 2010 General Audit Office report, released the year Christie took office, warned that the final cost for ARC could reach $12.4 billion. Among the many misgivings auditors had about the project was the way the approval process was rushed and detailed work plans were never completed, exposing the project to unforeseen costs, especially for buying property rights along the ARC route.
Cost overruns are one of the unwritten rules of major infrastructure projects, and Gateway’s $20 billion projected price tag will likely be no different. Even the lead agencies involved are unwilling to commit to that figure.

The Port Authority, which recently agreed to take over the leadership of Gateway, is in the process of forming a development corporation to run the project.

The agency’s executive director, Pat Foye, told fellow commissioners at a board meeting in December that preliminary estimates for the tunnel portion of Gateway alone are about $10 billion. A Port Authority spokesman referred further questions about the cost of other aspects of the project, as well as how those costs add up to $20 billion, to Amtrak.

But a spokesman for Amtrak, Craig Schulz, said that Amtrak has not specified a full dollar amount for the Gateway project.

“I’m not sure where the figure originated,” Schulz said, adding that the $20 billion is “an order of magnitude estimate in line with our thinking.”

Jen Nelles, a researcher in urban policy and planning at Hunter College in Manhattan, who is researching a book on the ARC and Gateway projects, said it may be too early to even try to guess at the cost of Gateway or to make comparisons between the two projects.

“We don’t really know what Gateway is going to look like,” said Nelles. “ARC is history. Gateway is a very dynamic situation.”

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
The Hill - California unveils bids for high-speed rail construction
January 6, 2016
Keith Laing

California officials this week unveiled bids for construction of a controversial high-speed railway that is being partially financed by the federal government. 

The California High-Speed Rail Authority said California Rail Builders has offered to build a 22-mile segment of the high-speed railway for $347 million, which is less than the agency's previous estimate of $400-$500 million. 

Republicans in California and Washington have questioned the viability of the Golden State's high-speed rail proposal, but officials with the agency overseeing construction of the railway said the private sector bids are proof of the line's viability. 

 “We continue to attract world leading design and construction firms who want to be a part of high-speed rail in California,” California High-Speed Rail Authority Authority CEO Jeff Morales said in a statement. 
“People are already and will continue to see major construction projects underway on over 100 miles of infrastructure in the Central Valley as we move this program forward,” Morales continued. 

The proposed California line, which would link San Francisco, Los Angeles and other major California cities, was part of an ambitious proposal from President Obama to build a nationwide network of trains that would rival popular European railways. 

The California high-speed rail project has received more than $3 billion in federal dollars, but it has been beset with delays and funding problems. 

The state's high-speed rail authority said this week that California Rail Builders, who it said is comprised of a company called Ferrovial Agroman US Corp., was selected from five proposals that were submitted in a competitive bidding process. 

The agency said the company has been involved in more than 65 high-speed rail projects worldwide and won eight projects totaling $8 billion in the U.S. in recent years. 

President Obama spoke frequently in his first term about developing the nation's high-speed rail network, which the California route identified as a potential cornerstone.

Obama included $8 billion in his 2009 economic stimulus package to jump-start the high-speed rail program in the U.S., but his stimulus offer was rebuffed by Republican governors in states including Ohio, Wisconsin and Florida, who rejected the money. 

Most of the money was later redirected to California, pinning hopes for a federally funded rail line squarely on the Golden State's shoulders.

AMTRAK
Home
WTVM (GA) - Southern Rail Commission releases Amtrak study of feasibility for return to Mobile
January 6, 2016
Steve Alexander

MOBILE, AL (WALA) -
The Southern Rail Commission has released an Amtrak study looking into the feasibility of returning passenger rail service to Mobile.

A new timetable was announced last month on when Amtrak service could resume on the Gulf Coast. 

Passenger rail service disappeared through Mobile in 2005 after Hurricane Katrina. There have been discussions about resuming an east-west route from New Orleans to Jacksonville or Orlando. 

Amtrak officials delivered a preliminary report to a meeting of the Southern Rail Commission in December, laying out options for restoring passenger rail service to the Gulf Coast. Commission Chairman Greg White said then, "There are conversations of 36 to 60 months as being realistic." 

Now the full report has been made available. The following is provided by the Southern Rail Commission:

Amtrak has identified a range of feasible service options and produced an analysis of ridership levels, projected revenues and associated costs. 

While infrastructure capital costs are not included in this evaluation, these service options provide a starting point for a detailed analysis of the capital needs associated with each option.

Of the five evaluated alternatives and sub-alternatives, Amtrak identified Alternatives A/A1 as providing the best balance of operating costs and ridership benefits:

• Alternatives A and A1: Extend a portion of the City of New Orleans consist from New Orleans to Orlando, with (Alternative A) or without (Alternative A1) a single daily state-supported train, priced under the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act, Section 209 methodology (PRIIA 209) between New Orleans and Mobile. o Alternative A would generate annual ridership of 153,900 passengers and would require an annual operating (and PRIIA 209 Equipment Capital) funding commitment of $9.49 million. This alternative provided the highest total ridership of any analyzed alternative. o Alternative A1 would generate annual ridership of 138,300 passengers and require an annual operating funding commitment of $5.48 million. This alternative provided the Report for the Southern Rail Commission December 2015 | 5 second highest ridership of all the analyzed alternatives, but the lowest level of identified operating need. In addition, Amtrak evaluated two alternate service plans: 

• Alternatives B and B1: Two daily state-supported round trips between New Orleans and Mobile, to be priced and funded by the state partners under the PRIIA 209 methodology without (Alternative B) or with (Alternative B1) a Thruway bus connection from Mobile to Amtrak service at Jacksonville. o Alternative B would generate annual ridership of 38,400 passengers and would require an annual PRIIA 209 operating and equipment capital funding commitment of $6.97 million. o Alternative B1 would generate annual ridership of 43,400 passengers and would require an annual PRIIA 209 operating and equipment capital funding commitment of $8.26 million.

• Alternative C: One daily long distance round trip between New Orleans and Orlando. This alternative would generate annual ridership of 69,100 passengers and would require an annual operating funding commitment of $14.4 million. Alternatives A and A1 yield superior ridership demand and cost efficiency over Alternatives B and B1 and C due to the availability of daily “one-seat ride” service between the Gulf Coast stations and points on the current City of New Orleans route, eliminating the need to change trains in New Orleans for travel between the current City of New Orleans route and Gulf Coast points. Since the number of passengers who are willing to make a single connection is greater than those willing to make two connections to continue a trip, ridership also increases on additional Amtrak services which connect to both the future Gulf route as well as the existing City of New Orleans. Cost efficiencies are also present, as a run-through operation requires less additional equipment than a stand-alone New Orleans-Orlando passenger train with dedicated equipment. 

To proceed with any of the proposed alternatives evaluated here, Amtrak and the SRC will need to: 

• Approach the host railroads (chiefly CSXT) to identify any infrastructure needs for the proposed service. 

• Identify and develop operating and capital funding mechanisms to support any proposed service. 

• Identify and build support from institutions which are likely to benefit from, and attract riders to, the proposed Gulf Coast service. • Work with communities on plans to revitalize station facilities. 

• Refine service proposals as a clearer picture emerges of the infrastructure environment and as marketing opportunities are developed along the route.


E&E Publishing - Amtrak must improve financial planning for Northeast -- GAO
January 6, 2016
Ariel Wittenberg

A lack of financial information could put a snag in Amtrak's five-year plan to repair critical infrastructure along its Northeast Corridor, according to the Government Accountability Office.

In a report released today, the GAO warns that unless the railroad improves its financial reporting, Amtrak could be unable to make all the necessary repairs.

The Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 required Amtrak to work with the Federal Railroad Administration to address how it could plan and fund the rail line to perform better. It directed Amtrak to divide its focus among four rail lines, one of which was the Northeast Corridor, with the idea that doing so would improve accountability and performance in all areas.

But the GAO found that Amtrak has not done an adequate job implementing corporatewide strategic goals along the Northeast Corridor.

"Amtrak's inconsistent and incomplete reporting of its financial data hinders Amtrak's ability to demonstrate the performance of its line of business," the report states.

The lack of implementation has had a detrimental impact on a five-year, $17.7 billion capital plan meant to make improvements to the Northeast Corridor.

But, the GAO found, while the investment is necessary to bring the Northeast Corridor's bridges and tunnels into good repair, Amtrak lacks funding for 60 percent of the investment plan.

Implementing the plan "would require Amtrak, states, commuter railroads, or the federal government to provide additional funding of about $2.1 billion per year through 2020."

The GAO also found that the Northeast Corridor Infrastructure and Operations Advisory Commission had not set up any criteria for prioritizing investment, which would make it more difficult for states to decide whether they should pony up funds for the repairs.
Changes in Amtrak management dictated by the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act were meant to result in an increase of state funding for the rail line, but the GAO found that routes that should now be mostly state-funded are still receiving significant federal subsidies to remain in operation.

While Amtrak has decreased its reliance on federal dollars in recent years, using $100 million less in federal subsidies between fiscal 2013 and 2014, Amtrak still used $86 million in federal grants in fiscal 2014 in order to cover operating losses from its routes.

While Amtrak told GAO it expects to continue to rely on federal funding in upcoming years, it "has not developed clear information detailing the specific costs and activities that this federal assistance is intended to cover," the report said. "In the absence of such detailed information, Amtrak lacks critical information to help it assess its costs and is not well positioned to develop strategies to reduce the costs of its services."

3


