 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 11, 2016
TV & RADIO
Columbiana Says There's No Need for Train Horns	2
Maglev Technology Receives Go-Ahead from FRA	3
Investigation Continues on Train vs Car Accident	3
CSX Investigating Train Derailment	3
MTA Still Feeling Impacts of 2 Year Old Fatal Derailment	3
Sherriff's Captain Injured after Directing Semi Truck Through an Active Railroad Crossing	3
NATIONAL NEWS
Progressive Railroading - Paris, California attacks heighten security awareness at transit agencies	3
DCVelocity - Two House lawmakers urge STB to reject CP's proposed buyout of NS	5
RAIL INCIDENTS
Noozhawk (CA) - Amtrak Train Fatally Injures Pedestrian in Summerland	6
The Augusta Chronicle (GA) - FBI still investigating Allendale County derailment year later	7
Eagle Tribune (MA) - Derailment in Andover raises concerns about train safety	7
Orlando Sentinel (FL) - Amtrak train hits pedestrian in downtown Orlando	10
WCMH-NBC 4 (OH) - CFD: Powder from derailed train not hazardous	11
NEC 
Government Security News - Federal Railroad Administration holds hearing today in Philadelphia on plan for Northeast Corridor	12
WAMU - More Rides, Shorter Trips: Agency Offers 3 Plans to Improve Northeast Corridor	14
CROSSING NEWS
WKBN 27 (OH) - Columbiana residents call for quiet zones near train tracks	16
HHFT
Star Tribune (MN) - N.D. oil trains shift route back to northeast Minneapolis tracks, BNSF reports	17
Argus Leader - South Dakota lags in rail safety	18
Bucks County Courier Times (PA) - Prospect of short-rail crude oil traffic worries some people	20
AMTRAK
The Hill - Retiring Amtrak chief foresees 'more robust' US rail system	21
Progressive Railroading - GAO: Amtrak's financial reporting 'incomplete'	22
The State Journal (KY) - Amtrak plans upgrades to Maysville station	23
CNN - Report: DEA paid Amtrak employee more than $800K as informant	24
KGTV-ABC 10 (CA) - Amtrak, Coaster service shut down this weekend as crews work to replace bridges, aging trestles	24
Lansing State Journal (MI) - At new E.L. hub, they're still waiting for the train	25
WPSD-NBC 6 (KY) - Community member raising money for a new Fulton, KY Amtrak station	26
Longview News Journal (TX) - Amtrak offering deal to say thanks	27
The Philadelphia Inquirer: Editorial - Ready for a makeover	28
STATE BY STATE
The Atlantic - The New Penn Station Will Inherit an Old Problem	30
Clearwater Tribune (ID) - Transportation department launches new winter safety campaign	31
Post Bulletin (MN) - Rail inspector seeks to stop future accidents	32
Grand Forks Herald - LETTER: Federal rail regulators: Nothing to see here; move along	34
The Wall Street Journal - New Name for Revamped Penn Station Surprises Moynihan Officials, Sparks Debate	35
The Star Press (IN) - City's quiet zone set to begin	37
TCPalm (FL) - All Aboard Florida receives 1-year extension to sell $1.75 billion of tax-free bonds	38
MINNPOST - Funding committed for environmental assessment of second daily train to Chicago	39
Hartford Courant (CT) -  Shore Line East Will Send Trains To Hartford Line, Get New Fleet	40
Gotham Gazette (NY) -  To Fix Penn Station, Think Smaller	41


TV & RADIO
Home
Columbiana Says There's No Need for Train Horns
WYTV (ABC) - Youngstown, OH

Maglev Technology Receives Go-Ahead from FRA
KFJX (FOX) - Joplin, MO

Investigation Continues on Train vs Car Accident
WEYI (NBC) - Flint, MI

CSX Investigating Train Derailment
WSYX-CBO (ABC) - Columbus, OH

MTA Still Feeling Impacts of 2 Year Old Fatal Derailment
NY1 - New York, NY

Sherriff's Captain Injured after Directing Semi Truck through an Active Railroad Crossing
WDTN (NBC) - Dayton, OH


NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Progressive Railroading - Paris, California attacks heighten security awareness at transit agencies
January 8, 2016
Julie Sneider

Recent terrorist attacks have prompted passenger-rail and transit agencies to step up their security tactics.

In the immediate aftermath of the November terrorist attacks in Paris and the early December attack in San Bernardino, Calif., agencies and railroads implemented several measures to tighten security.

For example, in the days following the attacks in Paris, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo directed state agencies, the New York State Police, National Guard, Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) and Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ) to be in a heightened state of alert following the Paris attacks.

At the PANYNJ, police conducted increased patrols and checks of bags, buses, trucks and trains at agency locations. MTA increased patrols and surveillance across its agencies. MTA Police stepped up presence of uniformed and plain-clothes officers at Penn Station, Grand Central Terminal and other major stations throughout the Metro-North Railroad and Long Island Rail Road network. MTA's canine teams and units armed with heavy weapons provided a noticeable level of increased security. Additionally, police increased patrols and "step-on/step-off" efforts on trains and implemented random bag checks at various locations throughout the system.

MTA's police department, MTA New York City Transit security and MTA Bridges and Tunnels officers shared intelligence information and coordinate their threat response with other police and security agencies. New York State Police and New York National Guard members have been assigned to high-profile MTA locations for more than a year to provide an additional layer of security.

The governor also issued an executive order in December to tighten security on mass transit during the holiday travel season. He reminded New Yorkers to remain alert and vigilant about what they see and hear in their surroundings, and report anything suspicious to the Counter Terrorism Center at the New York State Intelligence Center via the terrorism tip line or email.

In the nation's capital, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) heightened security measures in the hours after the Paris attacks and after an ISIS propaganda video warned Washington, D.C., would be an attack target. The agency's efforts have included increased WMATA police department patrols throughout the system, and additional sweeps by more than 20 K9 teams in and around rail stations and other critical infrastructure.

Amtrak and the Maryland Transit Administration, too, took extra security measures in the days after the attacks.

Transit agencies have continued to remind their riders to be alert to their surroundings and report suspicious packages, activity or behavior that they might witness while on the train or at a station. To that end, Metro Transit in Minneapolis in November became the latest agency to kick off a “See Something, Say Something” campaign. The agency created handouts and posted fliers on trains and buses, asking riders to report unattended bags, boxes or other packages left on vehicles or MetroLink platforms by immediately calling 911 or Metro Public Safety.

On the agency's blog, Metro Transit officials encouraged riders to apply the “H.O.T. Method” to their observations for things that are “Hidden, Obviously suspicious or not Typical of what is in the area.”

Meanwhile, in France, the French environment minister Segolene Royal, who oversees transportation issues, called for metal detectors in train stations across France. She asked France's national rail operator, S.N.C.F., to determine how to quickly put the metal detectors in place. Other European nations also have considered applying more airport-security-like measures to trains and train stations.

Although installing metal detectors in U.S. train stations hasn't been proposed to date, rail and transit agencies across the nation likely will remain in a heightened state of alert as consequences stemming from the terrorism  continue to unfold.

Also, a Nov. 25 report by the Congressional Research Service highlighted concerns that the federal government's major focus on securing U.S. airports since the 9/11 attacks has left trains more vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Titled, “Transportation Security: Issues for the 114th Congress,” the report noted that U.S. subway rail systems transport five times as many passengers each day as do airlines, and over many thousands of miles of track. The trains serve stations that are designed to be easily accessible so that commuters can come and go quickly. However, that design also makes the station more vulnerable to attack.

"A key challenge Congress faces is balancing the desire for increased rail passenger security with the efficient functioning of transit systems, with the potential costs and damages of an attack, and with other federal priorities," the report states.

The report also underscored that transit security tends to focus on managing the consequences of a terrorist attack.

"Nevertheless, steps have been taken to try to reduce the risks, as well as the consequences, of an attack," the report states. Those steps include vulnerability assessments, emergency planning, emergency response training, increasing security personnel, installing video surveillance on trains and in stations, and conducting random inspections of bags, stations and platforms.

DCVelocity - Two House lawmakers urge STB to reject CP's proposed buyout of NS
January 8, 2016

Two Democratic leaders of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee have urged the Surface Transportation Board (STB), the federal agency that rules on rail mergers, to reject Canadian Pacific Railway's (CP) proposed $27 billion acquisition of U.S. railroad Norfolk Southern Corp., saying the deal would solely benefit CP, its shareholders, and other investors at the expense of shippers and workers.

Reps. Peter DeFazio (D-Ore.), the committee's ranking member, and Mike Capuano (D-Mass.), ranking member of the Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials Subcommittee, told the STB in a letter late yesterday that the proposed deal does not meet the criteria for public interest benefits set forth in the STB's 2001 rules, which raised the bar for merger approval. The lawmakers added that they "have significant concerns with CP's proven track record of boosting profits at the expense of its workforce" and that "further consolidation of an already healthy industry is unwarranted."

Calgary-based CP has made three buyout proposals to the Norfolk, Va.-based railroad. NS' board has rejected each proposal, the last time being two days before Christmas. A CP-NS combination would be the first transcontinental rail merger in North American history.

CP said it would place itself in a voting trust and have its current CEO, E. Hunter Harrison, run NS while the STB evaluates the combination, a process that could take up to 22 months. The trust would be overseen by a trustee, who would insulate CP from taking unlawful control of NS during the STB's evaluation period.

In an effort to allay concerns that the combination would reduce shippers' options, CP has proposed that if the combined company failed to provide adequate service or competitive rates, it would allow another carrier to operate from a connecting point on the combined company's tracks and into its terminals. CP also said it would end a practice in the U.S. under which an origin railroad dictates where it interchanges a customer's freight with another carrier, even if other interchange points are more advantageous to the shipper.

In an e-mailed statement, CP spokesman Martin Cej said CP has "proposed a combination that creates a true coast-to-coast railway, enhances competition, improves customer service, and better supports the North American economy. We look forward to discussing our ideas in detail with all key stakeholders in the coming weeks." CP has not publicly responded to NS' board's rejection of its third proposal.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Noozhawk (CA) - Amtrak Train Fatally Injures Pedestrian in Summerland
January 8, 2016
Tom Bolton

Adult male victim struck by southbound Pacific Surfliner near Lookout Park

A southbound Amtrak train struck and killed a pedestrian Friday afternoon near Lookout Park in Summerland, according to the Santa Barbara County Sheriff’s Department.

The incident occurred shortly before 4:30 p.m. near the intersection of Finney Street and Wallace Avenue, said Kelly Hoover, a sheriff’s spokeswoman.

The victim was an adult male, Hoover said.

"As the train was approaching Lookout Park, the engineer observed a male adult standing on the tracks," Hoover said. "He applied the train's emergency brake system and sounded the horn, but could not stop in time."

The victim had not been identified as of 6 p.m., Hoover said.

Emergency personnel responded to the scene, Hoover said, and the train — the Pacific Surfliner (No. 790) — was stopped in the area. Coroner's personnel also were called to the scene.

Amtrak’s website indicated the train was being delayed by a “service disruption.”

Trains were given clearance to resume operations about an hour after the incident, Hoover said.

The Surfliner returned to the Santa Barbara station, Hoover said, and passengers were being rerouted to their destinations.

The Augusta Chronicle (GA) - FBI still investigating Allendale County derailment year later
January 9, 2016
Travis Highfield

It’s been nearly a year since a CSX train derailed in Allendale County, spilling more than 19,000 gallons of hydrochloric acid, and a federal investigation into
the incident is still active, officials said. 

When asked about the derailment last week, CSX spokeswoman Kristin Seay said inquiries are being handled by the FBI. Don Wood, a spokesman for the FBI field office in Columbia, provided no other details Thursday except to say it remains under investigation.

It was one of three Augusta-area train derailments in 2015 but the only one in which a cause hasn’t been assigned.

In April, about 39 cars derailed when a Norfolk Southern train hit a tree in Trenton, S.C. Officials determined that the tree had fallen across the tracks.

The following month, a southbound Norfolk Sou­thern train struck a stalled Trans United tractor-trailer on the tracks in Johnston, S.C. The driver, Thomas Blackiston, of Ches­terfield, Mich., was charged with disobeying a permit issued for carrying an oversized load, according to Augusta Chronicle archives. One locomotive and an empty car were derailed, according to a Nor­folk Southern news release.

The Allendale County incident happened about 2:20 a.m. Jan. 27 when the train entered a side track and struck tank cars parked near the Archroma plant in Martin, S.C. Two locomotives derailed, and officials reported that more than 4,000 gallons of diesel fuel and a gallon of sodium hydroxide spilled in addition to the hydrochloric acid, according to Chronicle archives.

Two CSX employees were injured but were treated and released from Doctors Hospital.

In a meeting at Mount Hope Bap­tist Church about two weeks after the wreck, CSX representatives, the Department of Health and Environmental Control and the En­viron­mental Protection Agency told a crowd of about 100 that there would be no lingering effects from the spill.

However, cleanup was delayed for two days while federal investigators inspected the site, one official said.

CSX and CrimeStoppers later offered a $10,000 reward for information leading to an arrest.

Eagle Tribune (MA) - Derailment in Andover raises concerns about train safety 
January 10, 2016
Christine M. Wade

BOSTON — The trains rumble past Peggy Rambach's Andover home several times a day, some pulling tankers laden with crude oil and other highly-flammable materials bound for shipping ports and refineries.

Rambach, who has lived alongside the tracks for more than 20 years, says she never thought much about railway safety until last week when an MBTA commuter train derailed a few hundred feet from her property.

"It really worries me, especially given how close the tracks are to houses," says Rambach, who lives on Arundel Street. "If there was a derailment or industrial explosion, we would be obliterated, along with most of the town."

MBTA officials said the train was empty aside from a conductor and engineers, and nobody was hurt in the incident on the Haverhill line early Tuesday morning. They blamed the derailment on cold weather that caused the steel track to "shatter," and say the investigation is ongoing.

But the tracks, owned by the MBTA, aren't just used by commuter trains. Major railroads use the line to move industrial materials and freight, including crude oil.

Recent fiery crashes involving rail transit have stirred public concerns about the transportation of crude oil, which has become a far more common cargo.

Railroads hefted nearly 500,000 carloads of crude last year, up from 9,500 in 2008, according to the Association of American Railroads, a trade group.

Two years ago, a Canadian oil train derailed and exploded, leveling part of the town of Lac-Megantic, Quebec, and killing 47 people. Last year, at least six oil trains derailed in the United States and Canada, federal officials say.

One of the major shipping routes for crude oil runs across northern Massachusetts and into southern New Hampshire by way of the Merrimack Valley -- passing through communities such as Andover, Lawrence, Haverhill and Plaistow -- according to Forest Ethics, a California-based environmental group that tracks oil by rail shipments.

But information about the frequency of crude shipments and how much is moving through the region isn't available.

A Google map created by Forest Ethics -- www.explosive-crude-by-rail.org -- illustrates the scope of a catastrophe caused by a derailment or explosion involving crude oil.

The map shows a "blast zone" in dense, thickly settled parts of Andover -- including Rambach's home.

The zone represents a mandatory, half-mile evacuation area for an oil-car derailment. A mile-wide evacuation area is highlighted if an oil car derails and catches fire.

"We've talking about highly explosive oil passing though downtowns throughout the country," said Eddie Scher, a spokesman for Forest Ethics, which used industry figures and train-spotters to identify crude oil routes. "It's a disaster waiting to happen."

He added that most rail lines are often unprotected and susceptible to tampering by anyone wishing to do harm, which raises concerns about terrorism.

While railroads have long transported hazardous materials, a boom in U.S. oil production is driving the record increase in crude shipments by rail, Scher said. Much of it comes from North Dakota's abundant Bakken Shale deposits.

Meanwhile, railroad officials fight to keep details about oil-train routing and frequency from the public, citing competitive and security concerns, he said.

Scher said that leaves people living or working near routes in the dark about what is being transported and the heightened risks of derailment, fire and explosion.

"We don't think any crude oil should be moving by train," he said. "It's fundamentally too dangerous."

Ed Greenburg, a spokesman for the Association of American Railroads, said the industry has taken numerous steps to respond to the concerns of state and federal officials, and the public, about moving crude oil by rail.

"We've slowed down our trains, we've increased track safety technology, operational reviews and track inspections, as well as stepping up outreach and preparedness and training with first-responders across the country," he said.

A spokesman for Keolis, the French company that operates the MBTA's commuter rail, said workers inspect rail lines twice a week -- in some cases daily -- to ensure tracks are intact and signals work properly.

"We're constantly inspecting the rails to check for buckling or other anomalies," said spokesman Mac Daniels.

Freezing temperatures likely caused the track problems leading to Tuesday's derailment in Andover, which disrupted service for commuter rail branches and Amtrak's Downeaster, said state Transportation Secretary Stephanie Pollack.

Federal regulators have imposed new rules to reduce chances of a catastrophic derailment. They've lowered speed limits in cities, ordered railroads to install electronic braking systems, and required stronger tank cars starting in 2018.

The oil industry has challenged some of those rules in court, while critics say the standards don't go far enough and lament that tens of thousands of older, less fortified tank cars will remain on the tracks for years to come.

Congress is considering proposals for new safety standards, as well as measures to curtail the transportation of crude oil by rail.

Overall, the industry's safety record has improved. Freight-train derailments have been cut in half since 2004, with the number falling to 1,210 last year from 2,350 a decade earlier, according to the Federal Railroad Administration.

Massachusetts has also seen a reduction in derailments, according to the agency, with five reported in 2015 compared to 11 in 2011. New Hampshire has only had two derailments since 2006, according to federal statistics. The data didn't identify what kinds of trains were involved or their cargo.

Cities and towns have scrambled to devise emergency plans and train firefighters to deal with the increased risk.

Local officials often work closely with railroads on preparedness, and obtain information on cargoes and routing.

In Andover, which has plans for dealing with a catastrophic derailment, Fire Chief Mike Mansfield said the proximity of the tracks to downtown and surrounding neighborhoods is a big concern.

Railroad companies have curtailed large shipments of crude oil through Andover in recent years, he said, but that hasn't alleviated the concerns of local officials about the possibility of a freight train derailment or exploding tanker cars.

Mansfield said materials more "hazardous than crude oil" pass through town, but he didn't specify what those are.

"It's a business, and they can run any commodity they want through here as long as they are meeting the necessary requirements," he said.

One of the major shipping routes for crude oil runs across northern Massachusetts and into southern New Hampshire by way of the Merrimack Valley -- passing through communities such as Andover, Lawrence, Haverhill and Plaistow -- according to Forest Ethics, a California-based environmental group that tracks oil by rail shipments.

Orlando Sentinel (FL) - Amtrak train hits pedestrian in downtown Orlando 
January 10, 2016
Steven Lemongello

A northbound Amtrak train was stopped in downtown Orlando Sunday afternoon after hitting a pedestrian around 2 p.m., the Orlando Police Department confirmed on social media.

Orlando police said the man who was struck has been identified as 26-year-old Samuel Luis Perez Torres.

Other media outlets reported that the victim may have intentionally tried to lay on the tracks in a bid to commit suicide. 

Amtrak officials would not confirm that claim on Sunday, saying more details would follow in the coming days.

The train was stopped between Concord and Amelia streets. Police taped off Concord Street on either side of the tracks and would not allow access from either direction as they investigated.

An Orlando Police crime scene unit was on scene.

Vernae Graham, an Amtrak spokeswoman, said that the train originated in Miami, and the final destination was New York.  None of the vehicle's 198 passengers were injured. 

"When an incident like that occurs, the locomotive engineer is the first to see what's in front of him," Graham said.  "The conductor gets off the train and walks to the point of impact."

After Sunday's collision, more than one member of the crew asked to stop working, she added.  

That effort to replace them added to the delay for passengers.  Graham said that local law enforcement gave the all-clear for the train to depart around 5 p.m.  

The train departed around 6 p.m., Graham said. 

WCMH-NBC 4 (OH) - CFD: Powder from derailed train not hazardous
January 10, 2016
Carolyn Yaussy

COLUMBUS (WCMH) — Columbus fire crews responded to a train derailment on the city’s south side just after 12:30 p.m. Sunday.

derailment CFD: Powder from derailed train not hazardousThe reported derailment happened near the intersection of Parsons Avenue and Dering Ave.

Battalion Chief Tracy Smith said fire crews noticed white powder spilling from the cars, but determined it was not hazardous. Crews believe it is sand.

No injuries have been reported.

The intersection of Parsons Ave. and Dering Ave. is open.

NEC 
Home
Government Security News - Federal Railroad Administration holds hearing today in Philadelphia on plan for Northeast Corridor
January 10, 2016

 Sun, 2016-01-10 04:41 PM

Washington, DC - At 4 p.m. EST on Monday, Jan. 11, 2016, the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) is holding a public hearing in Philadelphia, Pa., to gather feedback and comments from stakeholders and members of the public on its draft plan for future investment in rail along the Northeast Corridor. In November, FRA released a Tier 1 Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for NEC FUTURE, the agency’s effort to define a vision for rail along the Northeast Corridor (NEC), which runs between Washington, DC, and Boston.

This is the sixth of 11 public hearings hosted by FRA between December 2015 and January 2016. Following FRA’s presentations at 4:30 p.m. and 6 p.m., there will be an opportunity for public comments about the Tier 1 Draft EIS and the alternatives contained within.  Persons wishing to speak should sign up when they arrive.

WHO:          Federal Railroad Administration
WHAT:        Public hearing
WHEN:        Monday, Jan. 11, 2016
                   4 - 7 p.m. EST

WHERE:      Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA)
                   1234 Market Street - Mezzanine Level
                   Philadelphia, Pa.

A presentation by FRA will be given at 4:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. Following each presentation, there will be an opportunity for the public to make statements.

Editor’s Note: FRA’s announcement and description of hearings and goals were described as follows in an FRA release on November 10, 2015. The results of today’s meeting will be posted later this week in the Jan 13 edition of GSN’s Airport, Seaport, Rail and Border Security Weekly.

The FRA’s announcement and description of the hearings and goals was described as follows in a FRA press release of November 10, 2015:

The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) today released aTier 1 Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for NEC FUTURE, FRA’s long-term investment framework for the Northeast Corridor (NEC) between Washington, DC and Boston, Mass.

“Over the next 30 years, an additional six million people will live along this corridor. To keep everyone to move safely, quickly and efficiently, we need smart planning and significant investment in the Northeast Corridor,” said U.S. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx. “We are seeking input as we work toward developing a long-term vision that will prioritize rail investments to ensure a vibrant and safe future for the northeast region and the nation.”

The Tier 1 Draft EIS includes alternative visions for investment in the NEC. The visions range from maintaining the current level of investment and service to significant investment that would dramatically increase rail’s role in transportation for the Northeast. FRA will hold 11 public hearings to gather input and feedback from stakeholders that will inform FRA’s decision on a preferred investment program.

The NEC is the nation’s busiest rail corridor, with more than 700,000 passengers traveling each weekday through eight states and the District of Columbia. The NEC contributes more than $100 million every day to the Northeast’s economy, but it currently operates on outdated infrastructure, much of it built more than 100 years ago, with capacity constraints that cannot accommodate future growth. Choke points and aging infrastructure often disrupt the system’s reliability and performance.

“Trains that connect our nation’s university hub to its financial center to its capital ride over bridges built before 1910 and through tunnels built after the Civil War,” said Federal Railroad Administrator Sarah Feinberg. “NEC FUTURE will guide the region in developing a long-term framework to build a stronger Northeast Corridor that supports economic growth and creates jobs.

The Tier 1 Draft EIS, which outlines the various visions, is now available for download and review by the public at www.necfuture.com . Print copies are also available at libraries throughout the region.

FRA considered a broad range of alternatives for the NEC, beginning in 2012 with a public scoping process and analysis of travel markets. In 2013, the FRA consolidated nearly 100 initial concepts into 15 visions (Preliminary Alternatives) that varied by level of investment, service, and route. In 2014, the FRA evaluated the Preliminary Alternatives and identified three distinct Action Alternatives; these have been refined and analyzed in the Tier 1 Draft EIS. Each Action Alternative represents a different long-term vision for improving passenger rail service that will enhance mobility options, improve performance, and better serve existing and future passengers in the study area.

Public Hearings

The hearings provide an opportunity for public input on the Tier 1 Draft EIS. No decision has been made on which alternative best meets the region’s needs, and the FRA will consider all comments received during the comment period in making its decision.

Public Comment Period
The public comment period for the Tier 1 Draft EIS is open until January 30, 2016. Comments may be submitted orally or in writing at the public hearings listed above, online at www.necfuture.com , by email to comment@necfuture.com, or sent to: Rebecca Reyes-Alicea, USDOT Federal Railroad Administration, One Bowling Green, Suite 429, New York, NY 10004. Comments must be received by January 30, 2016, to ensure that they are considered and added to the public record.

More information is available at www.necfuture.com .

WAMU - More Rides, Shorter Trips: Agency Offers 3 Plans to Improve Northeast Corridor 
January 7, 2016
Martin Di Caro

Anyone who regularly rides Amtrak or any of the eight commuter railroads that share the tracks in the congested Northeast Corridor knows that high speeds and reliable service are not a given. Curved tracks wind their way through cities and towns, and bridges and tunnels creak after more than a century of use.

Traveling from D.C. to New York can take less than three hours on an express train, closer to three and a half hours if you choose the cheaper option — if you are lucky. The system is at or over capacity in many places, including choke points at the Hudson River crossings between New Jersey and New York.

Efforts to improve the Northeast Corridor will take many years and billions of dollars, but as of today the federal government is weighing its options: The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) is leading a study that includes three proposals up for public review, each with its own price tag and level of ambition.

The least ambitious plan would bring existing infrastructure into a state of good repair, shaving a little time off the typical D.C.-to-New York trip. The plan with the highest projected cost envisions a massive new project for intercity trains topping 200 miles per hour, slashing 90 minutes to two hours off the same trek.

All three proposals look to the future: the U.S. Department of Transportation estimates the population will grow by six million over the next 30 years within the eight states of the 450-mile Northeast Corridor.

“The corridor as it is today cannot accommodate that, and frankly neither can the highway or the aviation system. The question is how are we going to deal with it?” said Paul Nissenbaum, the FRA’s associate administrator for railroad policy and development.

It is the first environmental assessment of the corridor since 1978 when trips were a fraction of what they are now.

Each day 2,200 passenger trains and 70 freighters use the tracks between Washington and Boston, according to federal data. Amtrak’s higher-speed Acela and Northeast Regional trains carried more than 11 million passengers in fiscal 2014, a 21 percent increase over fiscal 2005.

Rail passengers are 70 percent of the combined air/rail market between New York and Washington, according to the FRA.
19th century infrastructure, 21st century transit system

“Many of the infrastructure elements we are dealing with here, from bridges and tunnels to the catenary system, the electrical system, the signaling system, are decades and decades old, if not more than a century,” said Nissenbaum in an interview at DOT headquarters in Southeast Washington.

“Those things have to be addressed. While we are doing that, there are some simple improvements to straighten curves, to add some track in targeted places, to improve platforms at stations to allow for quicker boarding – all of that gives us an opportunity to make some near-term improvements,” he added.

Amtrak’s trains are capable of traveling about twice as fast as their average speed in the Northeast Corridor, which is only 80 miles per hour due to the many curves and speed restrictions. But just straightening out the tracks and replacing obsolete infrastructure — a seemingly relatively simple order — faces difficulties.

Bringing the Northeast Corridor into a state of good repair, the FRA’s “Alternative 1” in the study, would cost $65 billion. It involves environmental impacts “with the addition of two segments in Connecticut and Rhode Island outside of the existing NEC right-of-way, including impacts on land cover, water resources, ecological resources, prime farmlands, and prime timberlands,” according to a study summary.

For its relatively low cost, Alternative 1 could significantly increase the level of rail service and provide modest time-savings. FRA estimates an annual increase of about 70 million regional and intercity trips under this proposal.

Alternatives 2 and 3 have estimated costs of $135 billion and $290 billion, respectively. They call for significantly shortening time travel time between major cities, but their projected ridership increases don’t jump off the page. For instance, Alternative 3 with its $290 billion price tag would accommodate only five million more intercity trips annually than Alternative 1, priced at $65 billion.

Given the fiscal constraints of the current political climate, are such ambitious proposals realistic?

“I think what is realistic is to eliminate some of those key choke points and bring the average speed up from what it is today,” Nissenbaum said. “Going through Baltimore, you go through a tunnel well over 100 years old where you slow down to 30 and sometimes 10 to 15 miles per hour.”

Alternative 3 also would impact the “built and natural environment along the entire length of the additional spine between Washington and Boston,” according to the FRA.
'Cost and legal implications'

Paul Lewis, a transportation policy analyst at the Eno Center for Transportation, a Washington research group, believes even seemingly simple improvements — like straightening the tracks — will be difficult.

“Straightening out those turns and making the track able to handle higher speed trains might require taking of property, expanding tunnels, or doing other, very expensive infrastructure that has both cost and legal implications that can slow up the process,” he said.

“I think it is important to think big, but it is also important to be realistic. Some of the proposals being presented are in the hundreds of billions of dollars,” Lewis added.

The FRA currently is holding public meetings throughout the Northeast Corridor to gather feedback on its three proposals, and expects to make a decision later this year. But the agency is not only estimating the cost of the potential upgrades; officials say there is also a cost of doing nothing: less reliability, less service, and the same old infrastructure in a region rapidly adding more jobs and people.

Officials also note that any infrastructure improvements would assist not only Amtrak’s passengers. Commuter railroads, including MARC in Maryland and VRE in Virginia, would benefit, too.

CROSSING NEWS
Home
WKBN 27 (OH) - Columbiana residents call for quiet zones near train tracks
January 10, 2016
Derrick Lewis

 COLUMBIANA, Ohio (WKBN) – City Officials in Columbiana are considering quiet zones near three railroad crossings after neighbors and nearby businesses complained about noise from the trains.

Harold Donnalley lives on South Main Street, just a few feet from the tracks, and hears the train all the time. He says it interrupts simple daily activities.

“Not being able to hear the TV, on the phone having a conversation. The train will go through and blow its horn, you have to stop and wait.”

The Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company says train horns are necessary. In a statement to the Morning Journal, a representative for the company said:

“The train horn will not be quieted. The train horn is a safety device. The simple truth here is that a train horn can save a life. It’s an incredibly important train device.”

If the area becomes a quiet zone, people living and working near the track won’t hear the horn as often. Conductors will not be allowed to blow their trains’ horns to warn traffic before a crossing unless it’s an emergency. Donnalley feels the crossing gate should be enough.

“If you can’t tell a train’s coming from the crossings being down, you know if they’re down, there’s a train coming. That’s what it’s all about.”

The Federal Railroad Administration says there has not been a train-related death in Columbiana County for Norfolk and Southern in the last ten years.

If the area is made a quiet zone, railroad engineers would have to make adjustments for trains at railroad crossings.

HHFT
Home
Star Tribune (MN) - N.D. oil trains shift route back to northeast Minneapolis tracks, BNSF reports
January 8, 2016
David Shaffer

Eastbound crude oil trains from North Dakota are no longer passing through western suburbs and downtown Minneapolis, according to a railroad route update.

BNSF Railway, the largest Bakken oil hauler, notified Minnesota officials in December that it has shifted crude-by-rail traffic back to its usual route via Detroit Lakes, St. Cloud, Anoka and northeast Minneapolis.

The shift had been expected. BNSF spokeswoman Amy McBeth said Friday that with the end of construction season, traffic is back to more traditional routes.

Over the summer, as BNSF worked on a $326 million system upgrade in Minnesota, it shifted most oil trains — about 11 to 23 per week — to tracks through Willmar, Dassel, Delano, Wayzata and St. Louis Park. This sent trains through the downtown, past Target Field and across Nicollet Island, worrying some local and state officials, including Gov. Mark Dayton.

Eastbound oil trains on this route tapered off in October, and now have ended, BNSF reported. Up to three weekly oil trains still go westbound on that route from Minneapolis to Willmar, which has connections to a southbound line, the report said.

Overall, the report said, 28 to 48 oil trains pass through Minnesota each week, unchanged since last spring. Each train carries 1 million gallons of Bakken crude oil or more. After leaving Minneapolis, oil trains pass through St. Paul and into Wisconsin bound for East Coast oil refineries.

Argus Leader - South Dakota lags in rail safety
January 9, 2016

Official: Low oil prices give South Dakota time to prepare for rail disasters.

The number of trains carrying one million gallons or more of volatile Bakken oil into Minnehaha County from North Dakota has dropped sharply with the plummeting price of oil.

BNSF Railway, which is required to file reports with the state on the number of trains carrying one million gallons or more of Bakken crude oil, reported a high of four trains a week in Minnehaha County in its most recent filing. That was down from a high of 30 trains a week in March.

The lull, predicts Minnehaha County Emergency Management Director Lynn DeYoung, is only temporary. When the price of oil rises, the number of trains will pick up again.

The drop off in traffic, he added, gives the state time to prepare in the event of a major derailment similar to ones that happened in North Dakota and Quebec, Canada, where oil trains derailed and blew up. The Lac Megantic, Quebec derailment killed 47 people and destroyed the city center.

“We have plenty of time to do it right,” DeYoung said. “We don’t have time to do it over after a train blows up here, there or anywhere.”

It’s not a new message for DeYoung. More than a year ago, he asked the State Emergency Response Commission to consider ways in which the state could get more equipment and training for first responders in dealing with derailed trains carrying hazardous materials. But, he said, that call went unheeded.

“I’m not aware they’ve done anything that would have a lot of substance to it,” he said.

It’s not just Bakken oil. Ethanol cars are shipped through Sioux Falls and neighboring communities. In September, an ethanol train near Scotland, S.D., derailed and caught fire. There are also other hazardous materials shipped by rail.

“Railroads have hauled hazardous materials for decades and decades and decades,” BNSF spokeswoman Amy McBeth said.

“We operate through many, many communities throughout the country, and we do it safely,” McBeth said.

The concern over rail traffic comes at a time of increased development near rail lines. In southern Sioux Falls, that includes homes and schools. In downtown, BNSF is removing its rail yard, prompting discussions by city officials about what will be developed there. Whatever is developed, it will be near an operational rail line, but officials haven’t discussed how close development will be allowed.

“As far as us taking a proactive approach of making a setback, I’m not aware of any discussions we’ve had about that,” said Joshua Peterson, the project manager for the city.

In Brandon, new housing developments are springing up near a rail line. City Administrator Bryan Read said he is not aware of any discussions about buffers. Nor does the city know what passes through on rail cars.

“We haven’t asked BNSF what they’re hauling,” he said.

Railroads have a business incentive to keep secret what they’re hauling for customers. The companies consider it proprietary business information.

But in May of 2014, the U.S. Department of Transportation issued an emergency order requiring railroads to disclose to states the number of trains that carried one million gallons or more of Bakken crude. Railroads are required to submit new reports if the amount of oil entering a state changes by 25 percent.

In South Dakota, BNSF has reported shipping that much crude oil in just one county: The state’s most populated.

Minnehaha County has seen a weekly average of as many as 30 such trains, although the current average is between zero and four trains weekly. They travel through Minnesota, entering South Dakota in Minnehaha County and traveling through Garretson.
Crews respond to BNSF train derailment near Scotland,

According to a rail freight map that outlines Bakken crude trains from the Minnesota Department of Transportation, it does not appear that trains carrying a million gallons or more enter Sioux Falls. But DeYoung noted that railroads are not required to report trains that carry less than one million gallons, and he noted that trains can be diverted onto other lines because of closures, repairs or other issues.

“Unfortunately, we see more oil come through here when there’s an accident somewhere else,” DeYoung said.

Sioux Falls and other communities along the Big Sioux River corridor see plenty of ethanol traffic. Ethanol trains can catch fire, but they are less of a concern than oil to emergency responders because they are transported at low pressure, said Sioux Falls Fire and Rescue Battalion Chief Steven Brunette.

“To me, that’s a lot safer,” he said.

To prepare for potential derailments, the Minnesota and North Dakota legislatures adopted fees to help communities purchase equipment, conduct training and make safety upgrades at rail crossings. Minnesota adopted a rail safety fee in 2014 that collects up to $2.5 million a year.

That’s the type of program DeYoung said emergency planners in South Dakota need in order to address a host of rail safety concerns, ranging from having the right equipment to training to protecting waterways. But Bob McGrath, the chairman of the South Dakota Emergency Response Commission, said he doesn’t think there’s an appetite among lawmakers here to impose any new fees. Nor has there been an effort to restrict development along rail lines.

“The state Emergency Response Commission has no input into that,” he said. “I think that becomes a local issue for zoning.”

First responders have turned to industry for training. McGrath noted that pipeline companies offer free training for the same type of hazardous materials carried by trains.

BNSF also has an extensive training program for first responders, McBeth said. In 2015, 10,000 first responders across the BNSF network participated in the railroads’ community hazardous materials training program.

“For decades we’ve worked with first responders in training and planning in the unlikely event an accident would happen,” McBeth said.

In South Dakota, 263 first responders in seven locations participated.

One of those places was Sioux Falls, Brunette said. The company brought in rail cars that were set on fire, allowing first responders to use foam to extinguish the fire. Another large-scale exercise is planned for May.

“They’re really good with training,” Brunette said.

BNSF also has its own trained responders, a crew of 250, as well as emergency equipment staged across its network, McBeth said.

But unlike other states, South Dakota, DeYoung said, doesn’t have a program to bolster its own resources and capabilities to deal with derailments involving hazardous materials. And the railroads, he added, “are only going to go as far as the state requires them to.”

Bucks County Courier Times (PA) - Prospect of short-rail crude oil traffic worries some people 
January 8, 2016
Kyle Bagenstose
Excerpt - Subscription Service

Long trains carrying millions of gallons of crude oil regularly travel over a pair of highly trafficked rail lines in Bucks and Montgomery counties.

A CSX rail line cuts through Lower Bucks on the West Trenton SEPTA line. In Montgomery County, a Norfolk Southern line winds along the length of the Schuylkill River.

AMTRAK
Home
The Hill - Retiring Amtrak chief foresees 'more robust' US rail system
January 8, 2016
Keith Laing

Retiring Amtrak CEO Joe Boardman foresees a "more robust" U.S. rail system after his tenure at the national passenger railway comes to an end later this year. 

“What I see for the future of Amtrak is a much more robust national network system. That’s where Amtrak really started," he said in an interview with NPR's "Here & Now" show. 

"It started back in 1971 because the freight railroads, which were just plain railroads at that time, by the way, they had freight traffic and passenger traffic," he continued. "At that point in time, they weren’t making any money on passenger rail — we’re not making money on passenger rail today either. So that’s a common issue around the world." 

ADVERTISEMENT
Boardman said Amtrak has grown a lot in four decades, and he predicted the company would continue to grow in the future as rail travel becomes more popular in the U.S.  

"I could think of myself as the mayor of Amtrak," he said. "The mayor of a pretty big city every day. With 84- or 85,000 people in the city. And we’re moving that many people every day up and down the corridor. We have to do that and provide food, drinking water, sewage, police service. 

"We are a very different railroad than anybody else you could really think of," Boardman continued. "And the communities around where we operate really depend on us. They see it as absolutely necessary across the country. That’s something that Amtrak is going to continue to do in the future.”

Boardman announced his plans to retire in a letter to the agency's employees in December.

"At the meeting of the Amtrak Board of Directors this week, I informed them of my intention to retire from Amtrak in September 2016," he wrote then. 

"At that time, I will have served nearly eight years as the president and CEO of our company," Boardman continued in the letter. "When I look back at this time, I see so many accomplishments and so many changes we made to make America’s Railroad a stronger, safer and a more important part of our nation’s transportation system." 

He said in the interview this week that Amtrak still has a lot of work to do, especially in its heavily traveled Northeast Corridor. 

“If you’re just looking at the Northeast Corridor — and if you’re really just thinking about the infrastructure — it’s getting to be 100 years old, whether it’s tunnels or whether it’s some of our bridges," Boardman said in the interview. "We have a new funding bill. We’re seeing very positive opportunities to make real improvement and real investment for the future in the specific infrastructure of the Northeast Corridor.”

Boardman said he is confident in the safety of the nation's railways, despite a pair of accidents that occurred in 2015, including a high-profile crash in Philadelphia that killed eight people. 

“The safety exists whether it’s with Metro North or whether it’s with Long Island Railroad or Amtrak," he said. "And I think that’s important for people to understand.”

Boardman predicted the next Amtrak chief would have to have a business background in addition to having experience running railroads.  

“Amtrak is changing a bit, in terms of its development and business acumen," he said. "There has to be a CEO who understands that, who sees the kinds of investments that are going to be necessary for the future, the different business models."

He cautioned that any Amtrak chief would have to remain focused on safety, however. 

"That CEO can’t forget that the main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing," Boardman said. "And that is to run these trains safely with good customer service and keep the national network together. It doesn’t work any other way, it needs to be connected.”

Progressive Railroading - GAO: Amtrak's financial reporting 'incomplete'
January 8, 2016

Amtrak's "inconsistent and incomplete" reporting of its financial data has hindered the passenger railroad's ability to demonstrate the progress it has made since it restructured itself into three business lines, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) said in a report published this week.

In 2012, Amtrak reorganized into the Northeast Corridor, state-supported and long-distance business lines, and established a structure to improve accountability for its performance. The GAO noted that the railroad's new strategic management system as implemented by the long-distance line reflects several leading performance management practices, such as linking line-of-business goals and initiatives to corporate-wide strategies, assigning personnel to execute the initiatives, and tracking the results.

However, Amtrak hasn't implemented the system across the remaining lines of business and departments. Better reporting, planning and financial information could enhance decision-making at Amtrak, the GAO concluded.

The report also noted that the Northeast Corridor Infrastructure and Operations Advisory Commission — which Amtrak and its stakeholders developed to address the Northeast Corridor's critical infrastructure needs — lacks criteria for prioritizing projects in its five-year, $17.7 billion capital plan. As a result, Congress and states lack information to inform their decisions about whether to provide additional funding for those plans.

Additionally, the GAO said that Amtrak has not developed clear information detailing specific costs and activities related to operations for state-supported routes that would be funded by federal subsidies.

The GAO issued several recommendations for executive action. They include:
• prioritizing the adoption of the strategic management system in all lines of business and functional departments;
• externally reporting how Amtrak's initiatives meet the goals established under the strategic management system;
• being consistent in its monthly performance reports and the five-year financial plan to show all Amtrak revenue and expenses by major function for each line of business;
• ensuring that depreciation expenses are appropriately allocated to the lines of business once underlying capital asset data are determined reliable;
• delineating specific costs and activities for state-supported routes that are covered by the federal government and communicate that information to Congress, such as part of Amtrak's annual budget request; and
• prioritizing capital projects under the Northeast Corridor Commission.

The State Journal (KY) - Amtrak plans upgrades to Maysville station
January 8, 2016
Mary Ann Kearn

MAYSVILLE — Officials with Amtrak said Wednesday the agency plans to invest more than $500,000 in repairs and upgrades to the Maysville depot.

In a letter addressed to “Citizens of Maysville,” Charlie Monte Verde of the Amtrak Government Affairs office in Chicago, said he was responding to concerns about the disrepair of the Maysville facility, brought to his attention through letters addressed to Amtrak.

Complaints of deterioration and an initial lack of response from railway officials prompted the community to get
involved in requesting attention be given to renovate the structure.

Maysville resident Charlie Clarke led the charge to have the depot repaired to make it more appealing to not only residents but to those traveling through the city on Amtrak.

CNN - Report: DEA paid Amtrak employee more than $800K as informant
January 8, 2016
Wesley Bruer

 (CNN)The Drug Enforcement Administration has paid out more than $800,000 over the last 20 years to an Amtrak employee to act as a confidential source, providing information that would have been readily available to the law enforcement agency through a joint task-force, according to a new report.

Documents submitted to register the Amtrak employee as a confidential source failed to mention the payments for information "that was available at no cost to the government in violation of federal regulations relating to the use of government property, thereby wasting substantial funds," according to a report by the Justice Department's Office of the Inspector General.

The DEA did not respond to CNN request for comment.

The DEA already participates in a joint-task force with the Amtrak Police Department to stop the flow of contraband on the mass-transit system and by directing the confidential source to gather specific information, DEA agents also "exceeded the terms of the Amtrak employee's CS classification," the report says.

The investigation also revealed that this wasn't the only instance, as an Amtrak Police Department officer assigned to work with a DEA task force registered a different Amtrak employee as a confidential source paying out more than $9,000.

The Inspector General's Office also found that the DEA had registered a Transportation Security Administration employee as a confidential source in violation of DEA policy, as TSA security screeners are "obligated to report to law enforcement suspected criminal activity that they observe in the course of their duties," a separate investigation says.

While the report states that the DEA also offered to pay rewards to the TSA screener for providing information that would lead to large cash seizures, no actionable intelligence was ever provided by the source and therefore was not paid any money and eventually deactivated.

The Inspector General's Office learned of the improper handling of sources by the DEA after beginning an audit of the agency's confidential source program in July 2015, which found a lack of oversight of more than 240 sources. "In fact, over a 9 year period, DEA documentation indicates that the DEA spent minimal time meeting to determine the appropriateness of the continued use of long term sources," the audit report states. 

KGTV-ABC 10 (CA) - Amtrak, Coaster service shut down this weekend as crews work to replace bridges, aging trestles
January 9, 2016

OCEANSIDE, Calif. - The North County coastal rail corridor was scheduled to shut down this weekend for construction, impacting Amtrak and Coaster train service, according to the North County Transit District.

This weekend will be the first of three January rail closures. The others will be Jan. 16-17 and 23-24, the NCTD said.

Crews will work on replacing bridges and aging trestles over the Los Penasquitos Lagoon, and installing a crossover track.

Amtrak plans to cancel three trains, and will offer bus service between San Diego and Oceanside, and Solana Beach and Oceanside.

The NCTD said it doesn't plan to offer replacement bus service, but suggested that Coaster users could ride the Route 101 bus.

The work is scheduled to begin on each Saturday at 12:30 a.m. and continue until Monday at 3 a.m. -- with service resuming for the morning commute.

The agency warned that there will be periods of substantial noise in the Los Penasquitos Lagoon area because of the construction work.

Lansing State Journal (MI) - At new E.L. hub, they're still waiting for the train
January 10, 2016
Ken Palmer

EAST LANSING - Tricia Moore sat in a car parked outside the old Amtrak station in East Lansing on Friday night, waiting for a train that would take her to Port Huron.

A couple of hundred yards to the west, lights from the new glass-fronted terminal building - the future home of the train station - burned through the fog and drizzle. A few vehicles rolled through the gravel parking lot toward the new building.

Moore, who uses the train to visit her sister every couple months or so, said she doesn't know exactly why Amtrak still hasn't moved into the new terminal but isn't too worried about it.

"I love Amtrak," she said. "(But) it's probably confusing for some people, seeing the new building and cars and buses out front. They might not know where to go."

For now, Capital Area Transportation Authority bus customers are using the new $6.3 million facility called Capital Area Multimodal Gateway to catch their buses. Amtrak customers are still using the old station.

CATA manages the transportation hub and moved intercity bus service into the new facility last November. A CATA spokeswoman said Amtrak signed a lease for the new space about two weeks ago. But CATA "can't do a thing" about demolishing the old station until Amtrak moves into its new quarters, she said.

The parking lot still hasn't been paved. That won't happen until the old station is demolished and all the paving can be done at once, CATA said.

"We are eager to have the relocation take place in order to better accommodate Amtrak customers -- as we have our intercity bus customers -- and complete all phases of this project," said the spokeswoman, Laurie Robison. "The timing decision rests solely with Amtrak."

Amtrak spokesman Marc Magliari said it could be another few weeks before the commuter rail service can transfer its phones, computers and other data capabilities to the new building. That work involves several companies, he said.

"We can't move the ticket agent without moving the telephone," Magliari said.

The new facility at Harrison and Trowbridge roads is three times larger than the old station a few hundred feet away. It has four canopied bus bays and storage space for luggage and bicycles. There also is an overflow area for taxis and buses and parking for 150 vehicles.

The project is funded by a $6.3 million grant from the U.S. Department of Transportation. Work began in August 2014, when the former Michigan State University Surplus Store and Printing Services buildings were torn down.

Amtrak trains stop in 28 Michigan locations, according to an Amtrak fact sheet about its Michigan service. Data for 2013 indicates the East Lansing station,with more than 66,000 arriving and departing passengers, was the fifth busiest location, behind Ann Arbor, Kalamazoo, Dearborn and Detroit.

Besides CATA and Amtrak, MegaBus, Greyhound and Indian Trails use the East Lansing transportation hub.

WPSD-NBC 6 (KY) - Community member raising money for a new Fulton, KY Amtrak station
January 10, 2016
JulianaValencia

FULTON COUNTY, KY - The train station you may use to go to places like Memphis, TN or Chicago, IL could be getting an upgrade. Fulton, Kentucky's Amtrak station sees 5000 people a year. It’s the busiest in Kentucky.

 Jeff Campbell, who lives in the Twin Cities is spearheading a project to replace the current Amtrak station in Fulton with a new one. He wants to make the station more appealing.

“I think the changes would be phenomenal for the community in terms of pride, in terms of welcoming people in a good way,” Campbell said.

The new station would be built in front of the old one leading up to the tracks. Campbell says he'd like to recreate the grand station Fulton had in the 1920’s downtown. At one point, that train station made them the “Banana Capital of the Nation”.  GreatAmericanStations.com says the name comes from trains carrying bananas stopping in Fulton to have their refrigerator cars serviced and rerouted. That train station was torn down in 1979, according to GreatAmericanStations.com.

“We have a very rich railroad heritage. You know, back in the day there were 32 passenger trains a day and the population would surge by 5000, 6000 people. We had two, 100 room hotels. We had the only opera house between Chicago and New Orleans. So, that's the kind of heritage that we carry,” Campbell said.

He's raised 83% of the costs through public and private donation or pledges. He hopes the community gets on board to help fund the last $10,000 for the project.

Campbell is hosting an informational meeting about the project Monday at 5 p.m. at the Pontotoc Community Center for anyone interested.

If you are a train enthusiast or would like to help fund the project you can send a tax deductible check to the Twin Cities Restoration Foundation at 9399 State Line Road, South Fulton, TN 38257.

Longview News Journal (TX) - Amtrak offering deal to say thanks 
January 9, 2016
Matthew Prosser

Amtrak is offering a buy one, get one free deal for trips to any point on the Texas Eagle route.

Griff Hubbard, revenue manager for Texas Eagle at Longview's Amtrak station, said the program is an effort to thank customers for sticking with the Eagle during ongoing construction projects that have hampered the flow of rail traffic — especially from Chicago to St. Louis and from Fort Worth to San Antonio.

Amtrak has had to use buses to ferry passengers through Central Texas because of upgrades to the Tower 55 railroad intersection near downtown Fort Worth.

"(Because of construction projects) for the last 24 months, the Texas Eagle has been represented about 35 percent of the time by substitute bus service on some part of its route," Hubbard said. "The vast majority of that (35 percent) came from the Tower 55 project."

Tower 55 is one of the most congested rail intersections in the western U.S., Hubbard said. It has been revamped with a $100-million-plus makeover paid for by the railroads using state, federal and local funds. It is now completed, he said, so is no longer slowing traffic in that area.

A $1.5 billion Chicago-to-St. Louis corridor high-speed rail project is near completion, allowing trains to travel upwards of 110 miles per hour.

"Other than some minor track work here and there, that project is 99.9 percent finished," Hubbard said. "So this is really a celebration of these large projects being completed, and a gesture of thanks to our wonderful customers who've supported us while we were making some much-needed improvements to rail service."

Tickets are available for sale through March 15, and travel must occur by March 20, Hubbard said.

"Advance reservations are required a minimum of one day prior to travel," he said. "You can get tickets as far in advance as you want, but the very latest you could get tickets would be 24 hours before departure."

The promotion is good on Texas Eagle only, and not valid for local travel within Chicago-St. Louis or local travel within San Antonio-Los Angeles. Seating is limited, and some seats might not be available on all days. The deal is good at any station along the Texas Eagle's route but cannot be divided up by routes or individuals.

"This is a big deal; we don't do stuff like this that often," Hubbard said. The last time such an offer was made more than 20 years ago.

The buy one, get one initiative was the brainchild of the local revenue management team.

"There's three of us who've worked on this, one in Little Rock, Arkansas, one in Austin and me in Longview," he said. "This is a homegrown idea, and one we hope Longview-area travelers take advantage of."

Amtrak's Texas Eagle train offers coach, sleeper, lounge and dining car service to 41 cities between Chicago and Los Angeles — including St. Louis, Dallas, Austin and San Antonio.

The route makes 27 stops, between Chicago and San Antonio, on the 1,308-mile daily segment of its route. In conjunction with the Sunset Limited, it makes another 13 stops between Del Rio and Los Angeles.

Of the 650 trips possible on the daily section of the Texas Eagle, the most popular is Chicago to St. Louis.

As recently as 1998, the Texas Eagle operated only three days a week each direction over its entire route. In February 1998, Amtrak added a fourth frequency to the train, and since May 2001 it has operated daily between Chicago and San Antonio.

The Philadelphia Inquirer: Editorial - Ready for a makeover
January 10, 2016

Transforming the lackluster 175 acres roughly bounded by the Schuykill and Walnut, Spring Garden, and 32d Streets into a new, pedestrian-friendly community with offices, an expanded Drexel University, and housing is not just smart; it is inspired.

The plan linking two of the city's most vibrant economic centers, University City and Center City, represents the kind of clear thinking that has been missing from past plans for the 30th Street Station area, among them covering the rail yard with a baseball stadium, convention center, or amusement park.

Separated by the river and Schuylkill Expressway, neighborhoods in the area are bursting with jobs and residents. Plans include adding three walkways across the Schuylkill and covering much of the unsightly rail yard with buildings and waterfront green spaces. One proposal also calls for more shops at 30th Street Station and a new transit center for long-distance buses and high-speed trains.

Some initial elements of the plan are already in the works, including a new Cira tower, but other ideas won't become reality until far into the future.

It makes sense not to rush the planning process, but the development partners, including Drexel University, SEPTA, Amtrak, Brandywine Realty Trust, and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, should try to get more elements of the project underway.

One early target could be to open an underground tunnel linking Amtrak trains and SEPTA's Market-Frankford Line. An underground interchange was closed in the 1980s, in part because of crime. But SEPTA is considering reopening the tunnel or at least making a better connection.

The transit authority should make the tunnel decision quickly. Commuters deserve a better experience than what they're getting from a configuration that sends them outside to battle traffic just to get to the dingy El station.

Right now, the Amtrak station, the old post office, and the Drexel and Cira buildings are islands in an otherwise gray limbo. The station's neighbor, the former home of the Bulletin newspaper, sits like a discarded box waiting for the recycling truck. The structure serves as a visible example of what should be avoided. In fact, it might be good to hide the building behind trees, vines, and shrubs.

Greenery and open spaces comparable to what exists around the train station could form an attractive gateway that unites neighborhoods and helps soak up all the gas fumes and soot from the buses, cars, and trains in the hub.

The development partners will need significant public funding and permits to pull off their plan, so they are seeking public input. One way to earn public support would be to show people how a revamped neighborhood would look.

STATE BY STATE
Home

The Atlantic - The New Penn Station Will Inherit an Old Problem
January 8, 2016
Eric Jaffe

What’s left to say about New York’s dreadful Penn Station that hasn’t already been said about the post-iceberg Titanic? The Western hemisphere’s busiest transit hub is notorious for its balance beam-narrow platforms, claustrophobic passenger concourses, limited and uninspired retail options, and uncivilized late track announcements that make the Running of the Bulls look like tea time. Like being party to the great ship’s end, the best you can hope about the experience is that it’s brief.

So take that general hatred of Penn Station, and add a pretty drawing of what it might become, and you’ve got a development offer no sane New Yorker is going to refuse. Governor Andrew Cuomo capitalized on that knowledge this week when he announced a plan to transform America’s most-despised train hall into an angelic Empire Station Complex. If the vision holds true to the renderings, the new Penn will be filled with light, air, and the end of all rudeness and haste.

It won’t be hard for the public to fall in love with the pictures. But what they don’t show is the lingering, complex, expensive, and increasingly urgent problem any new station will still have with that basic mission of a rail hub: moving trains.

The full Empire Station Complex project has three parts. The first is to redevelop the shell of Penn Station; of the options presented by Cuomo, the preference seems to be removing the theater at Madison Square Garden and building a grand entrance along 8th Avenue. Part two is to finish converting the adjacent Farley Post Office into a spacious new Amtrak hall known as Moynihan Station—a longstanding effort whose end finally seems within sight. The third part would link Penn and Moynihan via underground concourses into one great transit complex.

There’s a lot to like about Cuomo’s approach to the problem. He wants to move fast; private developers will have about 90 days to pitch plans, with a hope of nearing construction completion within three years (a timeline that not-coincidentally would have Cuomo still in office). He’s intent on securing private funding; the winning bidder will pay “nearly all” the cost, estimated at $3 billion total, in exchange for retail revenue generating by the vast new commercial options in the stations. And he sees the hub as a nexus for a great transit-first future.

“It’s going to have this state moving toward mass transit in a way it hasn’t been for decades,” he said at his press conference. “Transportation is what made this state 100 years ago. It’s what’s going to make this state for the next 100 years.”

The question among New York City transit advocates is whether the governor is as serious about the transportation element of the plan as he is about the economic development component. This is the same governor, after all, who within the past calendar year played hardball over funding the MTA to improve the city’s subway system, and who initially balked at funding the Gateway rail tunnel beneath the Hudson River that will ultimately ease Penn Station’s train capacity problem. Is Cuomo now the man who feels Gateway is “desperately needed,” as he said this week, or the one who said "It’s not my tunnel! Why don’t you pay for it?” back in August?

Ben Kabak, Second Avenue Sagas blogger and consistent critic of any new Penn Station that doesn’t put transportation first, called the latest plan “a lot of flash without much substance”:

    Despite promises to build the tunnel in his presentation, we still don’t know what the future holds for Gateway, and nothing Cuomo has said over the past few days of infrastructure press conferences has changed that reality. Gateway exists as an idea with some momentum and vague commitments to reach a funding agreement. There are no dollars flowing, no timelines, no studies, no shovels. Much as the World Trade Center PATH Hub was a $4 billion expense to create a shopping mall, so too might the $3 billion plan to overhaul Penn Station. And the sad part is that for those $7 billion in building expenses, we could have had a new trans-Hudson tunnel sooner rather than later.

There’s reason for even a serious skeptic to be optimistic about the recent progress on Gateway, despite its distant timeline and steep price tag. But Penn Station, by any name, still has plenty of challenges facing train movement that won’t be solved by a bright new passenger hall or even a new Hudson tunnel.

The platforms desperately need widening if there’s any hope of travelers boarding and alighting more quickly, which in turn probably means fewer total tracks, which in turn means improved logistical operations. A process called through-running has the potential to double rush-hour train traffic at far less than the cost of Gateway, according to transit professionals, but would require big changes to equipment and overcoming some technical barriers. Generally speaking, the hub can get more efficient; as then-Regional Plan Association chief Robert Yaro said in 2013: “we use half the capacity of the station and the tunnels going in and out to service empty trains.”

These are the sorts of systematic problems everyone will forget about when Shake Shack opens a stand inside the Empire Station Complex, but they won’t go away. Former Amtrak chief David Gunn once called the Moynihan project “an example of how the whole transportation planning system has broken down,” and now here it is bigger and louder. Cuomo has taken to comparing his recent infrastructure plans with those of Robert Moses. That’s a bold choice, in that it suggests finishing transportation projects instead of just talking about them, but it’s also a fraught one, in that it means those projects didn’t consider the totality of their impacts on the city’s future.

Clearwater Tribune (ID) - Transportation department launches new winter safety campaign 
January 8, 2016

BOISE - The Idaho Transportation Department is starting a new, annual campaign that will help drivers stay safe during the winter months.

The “ITD Winter Safety Campaign” offers information via Facebook, Twitter and press releases that helps drivers safely arrive at their destinations.
Save Your Memories

ITD’s Facebook page is at www.facebook.com/IdahoTransportationDepartment, and the transportation department’s Twitter account is under the handle IdahoITD.

“Short videos will present information on how to use Idaho’s 511 Traveler Services system, how to safely share the road with snowplows, maintain your vehicle during the winter months and drive safely in winter conditions,” said Adam Rush, the transportation department’s public involvement coordinator. “New videos will be posted to Facebook and Twitter, approximately every other week.”

The winter safety campaign helps drivers plan and prepare for challenging driving conditions by providing them with helpful information. This includes webpage links to neighboring states’ 511 traveler information for drivers who are traveling to Oregon, Washington, Montana, Nevada, Utah or Wyoming.

Those with questions about the safety campaign can contact Adam Rush at adam.rush@itd.idaho.gov or by phone at (208) 334-8119.

Post Bulletin (MN) - Rail inspector seeks to stop future accidents 
January 9, 2016
Dan Gunderson

BUFFALO — Rich McCumber drives a truck onto a rail crossing and lowers the small steel wheels onto the rails. Then it's off down the track at about 20 miles per hour, his eyes straight ahead as he talks.

"This stretch of track I do three times a week," he says as he searches for loose spikes, missing bolts, broken switches or anything else that could compromise the rails and potentially send a freight train crashing. "Three times a week over it. I learn my territory by heart."

An inspector for Canadian Pacific, he's responsible for 77 miles of mainline track in Minnesota, including this stretch in Wright County that, along with 8 miles of mainline siding, must be gone over three times a week — twice as federal rules require and once more per Canadian Pacific.

He tries to average 40 miles a day of mainline and must also keep watch over 13 additional lesser used tracks that are not inspected as often. It's a daunting job, one that gets little attention but carries enormous weight in an era of high-volume oil train traffic and rising state and federal concern over rail safety.

Train derailments can turn deadly, especially if train cars are loaded with hazardous materials. A third of all derailments are caused by a problem with tracks. Small problems like loose spikes or tiny cracks in rails can lead to big accidents. Visual inspections of rails are the first line of defense against disaster.

Canadian Pacific has done 28,000 visual inspections so far in 2015 in Minnesota and found 7,000 problems, said Scott Paradise, the railroad's chief engineer for track and structure, as he rode in the back seat of McCumber's truck during the Wright County inspection.

"That's 7,000 times we're finding something that we can either protect through a slow order or correct through planned maintenance," said Paradise, adding that CP's maintenance spending — $46 million on track repairs in 2015 in Minnesota — is higher than at any time in his 20 years with the company.

A broken rail is often caused by a small flaw or crack inside the rail. It grows unseen over time until the rail splits apart under passing train wheels.

Those defects begin before they can be seen, so the inspection work also includes a special rail car equipped with ultrasonic gear to look for cracks in rail. Canadian Pacific performs six rail flaw inspections annually on its main track, more than what federal law calls for, Paradise said.

The railroad also uses a specially equipped train car to test track geometry several times a year. The car measures distance between rails, and rail alignment. Rails that are out of alignment cause increased wear and lead to rail failure.

Federal regulators, however, are pushing for railroads to scan rails for flaws every day using devices that could be fitted on every locomotive.

"We need to continuously collect data, we need to analyze and we need to do the trending so we can predict exactly how much life is in a rail and when it's susceptible to breakage," said Robert Lauby, chief safety officer with the Federal Railroad Administration.

That change will take time, but continuous monitoring is the way to reduce accidents caused by broken rails, he said.

Railroads are always working on techniques to make rail last longer, Paradise said as he walked a section of track explaining how carefully grinding the top of the rail keeps just enough wheel to rail contact.

"You want the tread of the wheel to be firmly on top of the rail," he said. "We usually describe it as a dime, little bit larger than a dime. When you see a wear pattern like this it really is a preferable wear pattern."

Reducing friction between rail and train wheels extends the life of the rail and saves fuel.

Canadian Pacific and other railroads also use lubricants on the rail in some areas to reduce friction. And the steel used in rails has improved. Despite rail cars getting heavier and traffic increasing, the average lifespan of rail has increased.

The Federal Railroad Administration, however, says broken rails remain a leading cause of accidents and that many defects that cause accidents aren't being identified in time.

The FRA found a February oil train derailment and fire in West Virginia was caused by a broken rail. Investigators found the defect that cause the broken rail was missed by the railroad during two inspections.

The agency will push for increased training of inspectors who monitor rail scanning equipment and better use of software to compare inspection data over time and identify when a crack is growing, Lauby said.

The solution, he added, isn't more regulation but higher expectations in the form of performance standards, "look at the results and hold them accountable for certain failure rates to make sure those are low and decreasing."

Paradise says it's a balancing act to keep freight flowing and the tracks safe, but he insists safety always comes first.

"We do get into some healthy debates at times about the appropriate time and scheduling of maintenance," he said. "But I can tell you that there is nobody that would ever provide pressure internally to not take the appropriate action for a legitimate safety condition."

Minnesota Public Radio News can be heard at KZSE 91.7 FM in the Rochester area, or go online to MPRnews.org

Grand Forks Herald - LETTER: Federal rail regulators: Nothing to see here; move along
January 9, 2016
Paul Wulterkens

How do rail executives think? Have a listen to quotes from some of them:

"I would say it was a fluke." This after 405 similar accidents over the past 10 years, including two in the past month.

"It looks to be human error." This always mean it was the fault of the worker—not management, not poor maintenance, not poor training, not obsolete technology.

"It would make us all feel warm and fuzzy, but it won't make a difference." So said a politician (who's in Big OIl's pocket) regarding a proposed local ban on pipelines. It's also a sentiment that's trotted out when people call for local curbs on railroads.

This mindset perpetuates the myth that only the federal government can control railroads.

"Just leave us alone." As said by a rail executive welcoming the new Canadian prime minister.

"Track generally is the place that we're focusing at the moment, and it's clearly overdue. Rail head wear is one place in particular that we feel needs to be addressed as soon as possible." According to the head of the Federal Railroad Administration, that is.

But according to the director of safety for the union that represents track inspectors, "there was certainly a lot of pushback and a lot of political pressure put on FRA not to adopt regulations for rail wear."

"It's a lack of will, not a lack of ability, in my opinion." Spoken by an attorney representing two 19-year-old women killed in a 2012 derailment, as the attorney was trying to fathom why the federal regulators have not been more energetic.

Clearly, the railroad industry needs adult supervision, and the FRA needs to be reminded of its role. Sign the petition at moveon.org that urges much tougher rail-safety action by the FRA.

Paul Wulterkens

The Wall Street Journal - New Name for Revamped Penn Station Surprises Moynihan Officials, Sparks Debate
January 8, 2016
Andrew Tangel and Melanie Grayce West

Travelers often complain that New York Penn Station is confusing to navigate. A new plan to overhaul it comes with its own complication: What is the revamped transit hub going to be called?

Empire Station Complex is what New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo called a plan to improve the maligned station and breathe life into a stalled effort to build a grand train hall inside a neighboring post-office building.

His announcement on Wednesday caught some by surprise, including board members of the Moynihan Station Development Corp., people familiar with the matter said.

The state-run entity is named for U.S. Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who died in 2003 and was an early champion of the train-hall project. It has long been dubbed Moynihan Station.

In a city accustomed to re-christened public spaces, the names being discussed—Empire Station, Penn Station, Moynihan Station—sparked debate about which would stick.

“My inbox nearly crashed…with people saying, ‘Whaaaat?’ ” said Maura Moynihan, the senator’s daughter, who accepted to carry forward his deathbed wish to keep the project alive.

Ms. Moynihan, an author, said she wasn’t consulted about the name or told in advance of Mr. Cuomo’s plan, although she applauded it. While Moynihan Station has a “nice resonance,” she added, her father never expressed any desire to have his name on the project.

“Me personally, I don’t care what they call it, as long as they build it. I mean that from the bottom of my heart,” Ms. Moynihan said. “I think my father would feel the same way.”

A Cuomo administration official said Empire Station Complex is the working title of the project that includes Penn Station and what would be called the Moynihan Train Hall.

Those who worked with Mr. Moynihan differed on how to honor his role in the train-hall project, which has dragged on since the early 1990s.

Mr. Moynihan’s legacy on the project “is untouchable and not in need of any emoluments,” said Bill Cunningham, a former aide. “ Robert Moses isn’t remembered today because they named a power plant in Lewiston after him or a state park on Long Island.”

Mr. Moynihan, to be sure, is commemorated elsewhere in New York. The U.S. courthouse at 500 Pearl St. is named for him, as is an institute of global affairs at Syracuse University.

Still, Tony Bullock, a former chief of staff to the senator, said he was troubled by Moynihan Station’s apparent downgrade to a “train hall,” which he said was a term that didn’t befit the man’s legacy.

“Train Hall sounds too much like ‘food court,’ ” said Mr. Bullock, calling it an antiquated name for a public space. “It’s not a term that people use.”

The name Empire Station has also raised eyebrows, with commenters on social media likening it to something that might appear in “Star Wars.”

Penn Station’s name is a nod to the now-defunct Pennsylvania Railroad, which opened the original, since-demolished station in 1910 and dug the Hudson and East River rail tunnels serving it.

When Mr. Cuomo announced his plans at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday, he slammed the current Penn Station’s uninspiring design as “un-New York.”

Amtrak, which owns the building, doesn’t intend to change the name of Pennsylvania Station, said a spokesman for the national passenger railroad.
We Want to Hear From You

Have something to say about an article in Greater New York? Email us, along with your contact information, at gnyltrs@wsj.com. Letters will be edited for brevity and clarity. Please include your city and state.

Peter Derrick, a transit historian and former planner at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said there haven’t been attempts to rename Grand Central Terminal, also named for a railroad that also went bankrupt, the New York Central.

Jacques de Spoelberch, the great-great-grandson of Alexander Cassatt, the former Pennsylvania Railroad president who oversaw that company’s original project, said “Empire Station” seems more fitting for a station in Troy or Albany, N.Y.

But Mr. de Spoelberch, a literary agent in Connecticut, said revamping the station and adding additional rail capacity was a higher priority.

“That’s far more important than the name,” he said.

The Star Press (IN) - City's quiet zone set to begin
January 8, 2016
Keith Roysdon

MUNCIE — Hear those train horns downtown?

Officials hope that, beginning Saturday, you won't. Or at least that the horns from trains passing through downtown won't be as noticeable.

After a delay in implementation, the city's downtown quiet zone will go into effect at the stroke of midnight at the end of the day Friday. The Federal Railroad Administration told The Star Press the effective date was Saturday and Mayor Dennis Tyler agreed as he updated the Muncie Redevelopment Commission on the project during a Thursday meeting.

The quiet zone — intended to lessen the noise from train horns downtown to benefit, in part, the new Courtyard hotel — has finally become a reality.

The city funded the quiet zone through $3.5 million in agreements with the Norfolk Southern and CSX railroad companies, whose tracks run through downtown's southern edge. The city issued $16 million in bonds for the quiet zone work and a new downtown parking garage.

A quiet zone has been talked about for more than a decade. By closing a half-dozen crossings to motor vehicle traffic and increasing crash-prevention features at that many more crossings, officials expect that trains won't sound their horns through much of the downtown area.

The physical alterations to the crossings that remain open, including Walnut and Liberty streets, include high concrete medians to keep motorists from trying to dodge around crossing safety gates, longer gates and signs that read "NO TRAIN HORN."

The city put up such signs in December, when work was completed, but delays in paperwork submitted to the Federal Railroad Administration meant that the signs had to be hidden or removed.

"We tried to bag them, but that didn't work," Campbell said about the signs, which were ultimately taken down by removing a few bolts that held them in place. "Friday we will put all of them up and it will be official."

The city had originally intended to have the quiet zone in place before the Courtyard opened in mid-December, but the processing of paperwork delayed its implementation slightly.

TCPalm (FL) - All Aboard Florida receives 1-year extension to sell $1.75 billion of tax-free bonds 
January 7, 2016
Lisa Broadt

All Aboard Florida has another year to sell $1.75 billion of tax-exempt bonds, the railroad confirmed Thursday.

The extension — to Jan. 1, 2017 — is the second for All Aboard Florida, the company behind Brightline, the Miami-to-Orlando rail service that is to begin operations in 2017.

The U.S. Department of Transportation — the government agency that oversees private activity bonds — previously extended the $3 billion railroad’s original July 1 deadline by six months.

A “tough bond market” and investors who “lack the appetite” for a large issuance of unrated, or high-risk, bonds, are among the challenges All Aboard Florida could face in the coming year, according to local experts.

All Aboard Florida on Thursday said it will use the time to work out its financial plan.

“The extension provides us with necessary flexibility to pursue the most appropriate structure for the long-term financing of our business,” said Melissa Shuffield, All Aboard Florida spokeswoman. “We are under construction at each of our stations and remain committed to beginning Brightline service in 2017.”

When All Aboard Florida received approval in August to sell the bonds, the company said it could complete the transaction “within days.” But in mid-November it delayed a planned auction of its high-risk bonds, and in December confirmed it was seeking a deadline extension.

The company has not announced a new bond sales date.

All Aboard Florida over the last two years has come under fire from Martin and Indian River counties and Treasure Coast activists, who say the bonds were improperly authorized and have taken legal action to stop the project.

Brent Hanlon, treasurer of All Aboard Florida opposition group CARE FL, on Thursday hailed the delay as proof the project is doomed.

“AAF has twice had to ask for an extension from the U.S. DOT. The financial press indicates AAF is having a very difficult time selling tax-exempt and taxpayer-subsidized bonds to the investment community,” Hanlon said in an email. “This need for yet another extension reflects the project’s perceived weakness where it counts most, in the investment community. And U.S. DOT remains AAF’s benefactor.”

Meanwhile, All Aboard Florida’s request for a $1.6 billion Federal Railroad Administration loan remains on hold.

The loan, All Aboard Florida’s original financing plan, was relegated to second-line funding in August 2014 when the company applied for the bonds.

Construction of the passenger railroad already has begun between Miami and West Palm Beach, and service there is to begin in early 2017, with full service beginning in late 2017.

MINNPOST - Funding committed for environmental assessment of second daily train to Chicago
January 8, 2016
Joe Kimball

Several agencies have agreed to fund an environmental assessment of a second daily train between the Twin Cities and Chicago.

A study last summer estimated that 155,000 people would use the second train on the route each year.

Amtrak's daily Empire Builder already includes the Chicago/Twin Cities span on its route. The proposed second train would leave Chicago in the morning and leave St. Paul mid-day.

A coalition has begun providing funding for the environmental assessment, which will cost between $850,000 and $1.25 million, according to the Minnesota High-Speed Rail Commission.

The Wisconsin Department of Transportation and the Ramsey County Regional Rail Authority will each provide $300,000 for the project. The Minnesota High Speed Rail Commission committed $50,000 and the La Crosse Area Planning Committee recently provided $10,000.

The remaining funding is still being sought, but officials said work can begin in the meantime. The Minnesota Department of Transportation will be the lead agency.

Ramsey County Commissioner Janice Rettman, chair of the Minnesota High-Speed Rail Commission, said: "Adding another train would be a major step toward our vision fast, frequent passenger rail service."

Officials said the environmental analysis is proposed to be completed in two phases:

    Phase 1 would develop a more detailed service plan and a higher level of detail for equipment needs and railroad track capacity improvements. The feasibility study indicated a preliminary cost estimate of $95 million for railroad capital infrastructure improvements and $46 million for locomotives and passenger cars.
    Phase 2 would complete the environmental analyses which are needed because of the potential impacts of additional rail traffic in the corridor and improvements to tracks. The environmental work on the second train will be incorporated into the high speed rail project's Tier 1 Environmental Impact Statement. After the environmental analysis is completed and approved in 2017, track improvements could begin and train sets purchased, depending on funding.

Hartford Courant (CT) -  Shore Line East Will Send Trains To Hartford Line, Get New Fleet 
January 7, 2016
Don Stacom

NEW HAVEN — The planned Hartford Line commuter rail service promises benefits for more than just the I-91 corridor: Transportation planners expect it to be a boost for Shore Line East.

The state plans to redeploy Shore Line East's worn fleet of diesel locomotives and passenger cars in 2018 to the Hartford Line. They'll be used as part of a high-frequency schedule of shuttle trips on the route between New Haven and Springfield, where there is no catenary to power electric trains.

For Shore Line East patrons, that means the prospect of getting a fresh ride. Once the diesels are on the Hartford Line, the state Department of Transportation intends to start serving Shore Line East with some of its modern, clean fleet of M-8 electric trains.

"The goal is to be running M-8s out to Old Saybrook," Carl Jackson, rail administrator with the DOT, told the Connecticut Public Transportation Commission on Thursday.

Jackson predicted the new trains will build ridership and improve on-time performance on Shore Line East, which celebrated its 25th year of service in June.

Gov. Dannel P. Malloy expanded Shore Line East service in 2013, and annual ridership now totals about 660,000. But the operation is plagued by the high expense of heavy rail service run under a contract with Amtrak, creating possibly the highest subsidy in the state's mass transportation system.

Fares in 2013 covered an anemic 7.1 percent of its operating costs, even worse than the 9.7 percent figure of 2009, according to figures from Jackson. By comparison, fares on the highly used New Haven Line covered about 72 percent of operating expenses in 2013, he reported.

Improving the so-called farebox ratio for Shore Line East "will be a heavy lift," but the new fleet should help, Jackson said. The most recent records available show only 90.7 percent of trains reached their final destinations within six minutes of schedule, he said.

"One reason is that the equipment is old," he said.
State Leaders Promote Shore Line East Upgrades

Improved on-time performance will encourage more people to use the train, and the M-8 fleet with clean bathrooms, fresh seats, winged headrests and power ports at every row will make the commute more pleasant, he said.

The M-8s are already running on the New Haven Line from Grand Central Terminal, but their trips end at New Haven's Union Station. For Shore Line East passengers using the New London, Old Saybrook, Westbrook, Clinton, Madison, Guilford and Branford stations, that means at least one change of trains on their trip to or from the city.

The DOT is testing M-8s on Shore Line East track to ensure they work seamlessly. The tracks east of New Haven are owned by Amtrak and use a different overhead propulsion system than the one used on the state-owned New Haven Line.

Jackson, who used to work at the Long Island Rail Road, said he could foresee running Old Saybrook-bound trains directly from Grand Central on summer Friday evenings. The Long Island Rail Road's Cannonball from Manhattan to Montauk is so popular that it sells reserved seats, he noted. The Cannonball also runs with high capacity on summer Sunday evenings in the other direction.

Malloy's administration doesn't want to stop rail service in New London. It has considered extending Metro-North-style service all the way to Westerly, R.I. Malloy's 30-year "Let's Go CT" transportation renewal plan recommends $200 million for that project but doesn't specify when it would be done.

Meanwhile, the state may refurbish some or all of the existing Shore Line East diesel fleet before assigning it to Hartford. It's also preparing to order replacements in the next few years, Jackson said.

Commissioner James Redeker has said he envisions buying new trains for the Waterbury and Danbury branch lines at the same time. All of those orders would probably be done in conjunction with Metro-North, the Long Island Rail Road and possibly other public transportation systems to reduce costs, Redeker said.

Gotham Gazette (NY) -  To Fix Penn Station, Think Smaller 
January 8, 2016
Adrian Untermyer

Governor Cuomo deserves credit for jumpstarting the Moynihan Station project this week, albeit under a different moniker. After decades of neglect, commuters and long-distance travelers deserve light, air, and dignity.

But Cuomo's plan neglects the deeper problems that have long plagued Penn Station.

In 1970, one railroad controlled the transportation hub. After it went bankrupt, New York State took over trains to Long Island, New Jersey took over trains to the Garden State, and the Feds took on the rest.

Chaos ensued. Some routine trips now required three different types of tickets bought in three different ways. Passengers boarded from three different concourses with three different departure boards.

And worst of all, three different railroads clogged the same number of tracks.

Crowds, delays, and frustration become the norm. And after Superstorm Sandy decimated Penn's tunnels, the three railroads bickered and dithered as riders suffered.

Even with a reinvented station complex overhead, the Long Island Rail Road, New Jersey Transit, and Amtrak will still share the mostly same tracks, cramped platforms, and underwater tunnels. It's unlikely that decades of dysfunction will disappear after the ribbons are cut.

And with ridership climbing and Sandy repairs looming, the trio can barely keep up with the status quo — let alone support the expansion that the economy demands.

Cooperation would help resolve these problems. Running commuter trains between Long Island and New Jersey — rather than terminating them at Penn — could double capacity while opening up jobs to those on both sides of Manhattan. Coordinated communications and ticketing could ease crowding and nerves. And other options, such as sharing services, would slow the rate of fare increases for riders of all stripes.

To truly fix Penn Station, Cuomo must look beyond the building. Cooperation among the railroads is the missing ingredient in the governor's plan.

3


