 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 26, 2016
TV & RADIO
Five empty coal cars being re-railed after a yard derailment	2
New dash-cam video of Sherriff's deputy being run over by semi as semi is hit by train	2
Intermittent railroad crossing closures in Apex	2
CSX flooded out of Birmingham by beavers	2
LIRR and MTA under fire for failing public trust in aftermath of snow storm	2
METRO NORTH
LOHUD (NY) - Feds may slash hours for Metro-North track workers	2
HIGH SPEED RAIL
San Francisco Business Times - High-speed rail project could change tracks toward Bay Area	4
HHFT
The Motley Fool (NY) - What CSX Management Sees Ahead for 2016	5
AMTRAK
New York Times - The Wreck of Amtrak 188	7
The Advocate (LA) - Amtrak, officials taking tour for potential New Orleans to Orlando rail service	18
NJ.com - Livingston man files suit over Amtrak derailment injuries	18
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR
Delaware Online - Comment period for expanded rail service extended	19
Philly.com - Extended public comment period for Northeast rail corridor options	20
STATE BY STATE
Battle Creek Enquirer (MI) - City moves on $3.5 million downtown rail quiet zone	21
The Times Picayne (LA) - John Bel Edwards talks light rail, New Orleans airport ramp with transportation secretary	21


TV & RADIO
Home
Five empty coal cars being re-railed after a yard derailment
KWQC-DAV (NBC) - Davenport, IA 

New dash-cam video of Sherriff's deputy being run over by semi as semi is hit by train
WWJ-DET (CBS) - Detroit, MI

Intermittent railroad crossing closures in Apex  
WILM (CBS) - Wilmington, NC

CSX flooded out of Birmingham by beavers
WDFX (FOX) - Dothan, AL

LIRR and MTA under fire for failing public trust in aftermath of snow storm
WCBS-NY (CBS) - New York, NY

METRO NORTH
Home
LOHUD (NY) - Feds may slash hours for Metro-North track workers
January 25, 2016
Thomas C. Zambito

Federal railroad safety officials are weighing a rule change that would limit the hours Metro-North’s track workers can spend fixing the rails every day, The Journal News/lohud has learned.

The move comes immediately following an investigation The Journal News/lohud published last week that revealed Metro-North track workers have doubled, and in some cases, tripled their annual compensation with six-figure overtime payouts as the railroad gets to work fixing track where maintenance was neglected for years.

Machinist Eduardo Vargas, for instance, logged 5,043 hours last year, a total that averages out to roughly 14-hour days, seven days a week for a year, the investigation found.

The Federal Railroad Administration, as part of its top-to-bottom probe of Metro-North’s safety practices, is considering a rule preventing track workers from working around the clock, a key factor in the commuter rail’s overtime surge.

“As part of our Operation Deep Dive, we’re analyzing the risk of 'maintenance-of-way' employee fatigue as a result of scheduling and staffing,” said FRA spokesman Marc Willis.

The FRA launched Operation Deep Dive after a Metro-North engineer fell asleep at the controls of a Manhattan-bound train that derailed in December 2013 while going 82 mph along a curve in the Bronx marked for 30 mph. Four passengers were killed and dozens of others injured. The report cited Metro-North for its “poor safety culture” and an overemphasis on on-time performance.

The Journal News/lohud investigation revealed that Vargas earned more than $300,000 in overtime alone in 2013 and 2014, according to Metro-North compensation records. His $309,000 total payout in 2014 ranked him third among all Metro-North employees, ahead of railroad President Joseph Giulietti’s $268,000.

And he wasn’t the only one. Veteran track supervisor Robert M. O’Connell worked 4,876 hours last year and Richard R. Bourt Jr., who holds the same title, logged 3,832 hours. Both ranked among Metro-North’s biggest overtime earners in 2013 and 2014, railroad records show.

Unlike other Metro-North employees, track workers are not bound by so-called “hours of service” rules that limit how many hours they can spend at work on a given day.

Worker fatigue

The FRA is weighing the rule change at the same time it is taking a closer look at the impact worker fatigue plays in railroad accidents across the country. The agency is in the final stages of creating a “System Safety Program Rule” requiring passenger railroads and certain freight railroads to develop fatigue management plans for employees, Willis said.

In an interview with The Journal News, Giulietti said labor agreements limit his authority to curtail the hours worked by maintenance-of-way employees.

Chris Silvera, the head of the union representing the workers, said the Teamsters are working closely with management to keep a closer eye on the number of hours track workers spend on the job.

“I know they want to change the rule,” said Silvera, the secretary-treasurer of the Teamsters union, Local 808. “What we’re doing is closely monitoring the work our people are doing so they don’t get tired.”

But, Silvera said, the issue becomes more complicated during major snowstorms or derailments when track workers are needed to get the rails up and running again as quickly as possible.

No way around it

“There’s no way around it,” Silvera said. “You could hire a lot more people but it becomes even more expensive.”

And, Silvera noted, experienced track workers require years of training. The railroad has been coping with a record number of retirements that has caused a “hollowing out” of its workforce, according to federal safety investigators.

In recent years, overtime for track workers has averaged between $10 million and $15 million per year, Metro-North says.

Last year, the railroad’s total overtime tab was $89 million, down from $98 million in 2013, but a significant increase from the $68 million total in 2013.

Metro-North says the increase can be attributed to a 2014 labor agreement that included retroactive pay and overtime increases for employees. The railroad paid out an extra $20 million in overtime in 2014 as a result of the labor agreement, officials say.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
San Francisco Business Times - High-speed rail project could change tracks toward Bay Area
January 25, 2016
Gina Hall

A 2012 decision to build the first high-speed train operating segment from Burbank north into the Central Valley may be derailed in favor of San Jose.

A new proposal would focus on building the initial high-speed rail segment between Silicon Valley and Bakersfield. The Burbank-Central Valley section may be delayed as it is expected to be pricey and challenging due to tunneling costs, according to a report in the Los Angeles Times.

"This would seriously be a game-changing win," Carl Guardino of the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, who also sits on the California Transportation Commission, told the Mercury News. "One of the big winners would actually be our efforts to electrify Caltrain. High-speed rail comes to San Jose and we electrify Caltrain between San Jose and San Francisco; the winner is everyone who depends on additional speed, with less noise and less pollution."
So what would be the impact on Silicon Valley?

Less traffic
There is considerable traffic congestion for commuters coming to San Jose from the Central Valley.
"Right now, we have 50,000 commuters every day coming north from the Central Valley," Santa Clara County Supervisor Rod Diridon Sr. told the Mercury News. "Highway 152 and I-580 get jam-packed and it's taking people 2½ hours to come from Fresno to work."
Diridon pointed out that the bullet train could shorten that stretch to 51 minutes and connect commuters to their workplace by bus, train and light rail.

Back on track
The $68 billion project started construction in Fresno in July, 2½ years behind schedule. Starting construction quickly in the Bay Area could be a less risky and less expensive option to get the project up and runnning. If California can get a big section of the rail built, it would help bolster the project against political backlash.
There would still be some red tape to cut through, even if the decision goes San Jose’s way.
"If it ran adjacent to the Union Pacific right of way it can be done quickly and inexpensively," Diridon told the Mercury News. But Diridon also pointed out that the route also goes through San Jose's Willow Glen neighborhood, and the residents are "not excited about that.”

Sorry SoCal
Building the first segment starting in Burbank would provide Southern Californians with a 15-minute ride to Palmdale, a station in the Central Valley that will eventually become a stop on the way to Las Vegas. While the segment would help alleviate serious traffic in the Los Angeles area, it would also be the most challenging and expensive segment, having to navigate the Tehachapi and San Gabriel mountains with tunnels and aerial structures.

Southern California officials are still fighting to start the project on their own turf.
"You can't ignore Southern California or Los Angeles or Orange County and say we are going to go north, period. It made sense to start in the south, given the population and the serious transportation problems here," Richard Katz, a Southern California transportation official and former Assembly majority leader, told the Times.

HHFT
Home
The Motley Fool (NY) - What CSX Management Sees Ahead for 2016
January 25, 2016
Dan Caplinger

Railroad giant CSX (NASDAQ:CSX) has continued to struggle after releasing its fourth-quarter financial results earlier this month, and investors aren't sure whether the railroad's future direction will reward its shareholders in the long run. Yet even though CSX CEO Michael Ward and his executive team acknowledged the difficulties it faces, the railroad still thinks it can outpace Norfolk Southern (NYSE:NSC) and other peers with its unique set of opportunities.

Let's take a closer look at what CSX's leaders had to say.

"Over the past five years, CSX has transformed its business to continue delivering solid results despite the global energy transition." -- CEO Michael Ward

In the past, railroads like CSX and Norfolk Southern depended heavily on transporting coal to energy-hungry utility customers and other buyers. In recent years, though, the drop in natural gas prices has made coal less attractive to utilities, so the need for coal shipments has fallen dramatically.

Ward is pleased with CSX's ability to adapt to changing conditions in energy, citing the fact that the railroad has overcome large declines in coal-related revenue by diversifying its mix of services to embrace other industries in place of coal. Moreover, with service improvements and longer-term growth investments, CSX has managed to cut its coal exposure by more than a third in just four years. Coal now represents less than a fifth of CSX's revenue, and although it's still important, CSX seems prepared for whatever happens to the market in the future.

"Looking forward, we expect volume to decline in the first quarter. We expect a challenging freight environment to continue as the headwinds associated with coal, low commodity prices, and a strong U.S. dollar more than offset the markets that will show growth." -- CFO Frank Lonegro

As 2016 begins, CSX unfortunately doesn't see a quick rebound. In addition to energy, the railroad also foresees difficulty in the agricultural products arena because of low corn prices and a strong dollar. Chemicals and metals will also likely see substantial declines.

Not every area will do badly. CSX has high hopes for growth in the automotive area, and it believes highway and nonresidential construction will help boost its minerals segment. Intermodal will likely come in flat as international challenges offset domestic growth. Still, the tepid performance companywide will necessitate continuing diligence to keep costs under control.

"Our ex-coal pricing actually improved from the third quarter. ... All-in went down, and there really is a reflection of what we did in the export coal market." -- Chief Sales & Marketing Officer Fredrik Eliasson

Pricing has been a key component of keeping CSX profitable, and the company has stayed disciplined in most of its markets. The exception has been in shipping coal for export, where the company hasn't suffered the same fuel-surcharge-related declines in revenue, and therefore identified it as an opportunity to gain market share by being flexible on pricing. CSX hopes it can use its available capacity to generate profitable business without sacrificing too much of its margins, and in a weak market, that's been vital for CSX's customers.

"Looking at our capital allocation for 2016, you can see that over half the investment will be used to maintain infrastructure to help ensure a safe and fluid network." -- Lonegro

Safety has been a prime concern for CSX, Norfolk Southern, and other railroads, especially with the higher volume of crude-oil-transporting trains and the potential for dangerous derailments. Lonegro said most of CSX's spending for the year will be on upgrades to its locomotive fleet, with the company expecting 100 new locomotives in 2016.

However, CSX will also look for growth opportunities. The company set its highest priority on its intermodal business, on ways to make traffic along its rail network flow more smoothly, and on technology-related innovations to boost productivity. Although CSX will also spend money on implementing positive train control requirements, it will spend about $300 million in 2016 on the project, compared to the $1.5 billion it has spent in past years.

"There haven't been any mergers under the current regulatory environment." -- Ward

Consolidation in the railroad industry has been under discussion for years, with Norfolk Southern engaged in a takeover battle with Canadian Pacific. Ward was careful in addressing a question about the merger, noting he believes the Surface Transportation Board of the Department of Transportation will focus on the public interest of any merger as well as any secondary impacts on shipping markets. Beyond that, the unanswered question is whether divestitures would be required in approving any merger in the industry.

CSX continues to face challenges, but it's working hard to overcome them. The comments from its leaders show that the railroad has high hopes of emerging on top of the industry in 2016 and beyond.

Something big just happened
I don't know about you, but I always pay attention when one of the best growth investors in the world gives me a stock tip. Motley Fool co-founder David Gardner (whose growth-stock newsletter was the best performing in the world as reported by The Wall Street Journal)* and his brother, Motley Fool CEO Tom Gardner, just revealed two brand new stock recommendations. Together, they've tripled the stock market's return over the last 13 years. And while timing isn't everything, the history of Tom and David's stock picks shows that it pays to get in early on their ideas.

AMTRAK
Home
New York Times - The Wreck of Amtrak 188
January 26, 2016
Matthew Shaer

From 30th Street Station, the train glided northwest out of Philadelphia, tracing the arc of the freeway. Near the old Schuylkill River Bridge, it jogged right, gathering speed, bound for the New Jersey border. Had you been standing anywhere near the tracks, you would have heard Amtrak 188 before you saw it, in the hum of the rail bed and the metallic shiver of the electricity in the overhead catenary wires. And then you would have felt it, in the vibration of the earth: the combined weight of a 98-ton locomotive and seven 50-ton cars, carrying a total of 258 people, eight of them employees.

At the head end of 188, swaddled in a cushioned chair stitched with the Amtrak insignia, the 32-year-old engineer, Brandon Bostian, watched the apartment houses of North Philadelphia bleed into view, his boots resting on the corrugated metal floor. Around him, in a tight semicircle, were a series of square screens that displayed speed, brake-pipe pressure and the feed from the rear-facing video cameras. With his left hand, he slid forward a red-handled lever — the master controller — to send a surge of electricity from the catenary system to the traction motors that gripped the rails.

The locomotive under Bostian’s command that night — May 12, 2015 — was an ACS-64 Cities Sprinter, the most advanced engine in the Amtrak fleet. A modification of a machine long used in Europe, the ACS-64 is rated by its manufacturer, Siemens, at 8,600 horsepower, burly enough to haul seven fully loaded coaches at speeds of up to 125 miles per hour. But in the cab of 188, walled off from the outside world by two panes of reinforced glass, the loudest sounds would have been the burp of the radio and the intermittent whine of the alerter, which triggers if an engineer takes his hands off the controls for more than a few seconds, shutting off only once the round red “acknowledge” button on the dashboard has been depressed.

At around 9:16 p.m., the train crossed the intersection at North 22nd Street. In Reyburn Park, the fluorescent lights gleamed. The skies above were clear, with the temperature hovering at 82 degrees. A westerly wind gusted gently at 20 m.p.h., flattening the trackside weeds. Bostian was less than a mile from North Philadelphia Station, where 188 did not stop, and roughly three miles and three minutes from Frankford Junction, one of the sharpest curves on the Northeast Corridor. The last thing Bostian says he remembers, according to his lawyer, was ringing the in-cab bell as he passed the station house, headed toward the junction.

In the days and weeks and months to come, every part of his northbound journey would be dissected by law enforcement, by the news media, by the public. It would be said, correctly, that the wreck of Amtrak 188 was the worst kind of anomaly — that train travel was safer than many other forms of travel, cars included, and that Amtrak’s safety record was sterling. (This, too, is accurate: From 2000 to 2014, accidents on Amtrak routes dropped to 1.7 accidents per million passenger-miles from 4.1.) Bostian’s personal life would be picked apart, his state of mind questioned. Theories would be floated and discredited: that there was some sort of mechanical problem with the locomotive, or the track, or the signals (none of the above). That Bostian was on his phone at the time of the accident (he was not). That he was using drugs or drinking (his blood was clean).

Finally, investigators would turn their focus on the section of track between North Philadelphia Station and Frankford Junction. Three miles of train travel: the distance it took for an otherwise unremarkable trip, overseen by an engineer known for his prudence, to go violently, impossibly wrong.

There seems never to have been a time when Brandon Bostian did not dream of a career on the railroad. Growing up in suburban Tennessee, a shy and slightly gawky introvert, he papered the walls of his bedroom with pictures of locomotives and made regular pilgrimages to Central Station in Memphis. There, in the evenings, he would observe the arrival of the City of New Orleans, an overnighter immortalized in the 1971 folk song of the same name (“Mothers with their babes asleep rocking to the gentle beat/And the rhythm of the rails is all they feel”). “When you heard the name Brandon Bostian, the first thing you would think is trains,” one friend told The Times.

Most kids outgrow their love of trains. Bostian never did. At the University of Missouri, he studied journalism and business and attended a nondenominational Christian church called the Rock. Openly gay later in life, Bostian dated women in college. “He was never exactly the life of the party,” a fellow Rock parishioner told me. “It took some time to get to know him. Once you did, you saw how truly kind he was, and how smart.” And yet the railroad was never far from Bostian’s mind. A college roommate remembers him holed up in his dorm room, playing train simulators on the computer. He amassed books on trains, small metal models of them. During his senior year, he landed a part-time gig as a brakeman with a regional railway and then later a conductor with Amtrak, and by 2010, he had migrated out to the Bay Area to work as a contract engineer for Caltrain, the local commuter-rail line.

To a remarkable extent, Bostian’s weeks were structured around the railroad. He spent his workdays in the cab and his evenings online on train message boards and forums, gossiping with other professionals and analyzing recent accidents. “I think it’s all about taking the safest action,” he wrote at one point in 2009, in reference to a crash he viewed as preventable. A fellow engineer told me recently, “That kind of devotion is unusual.” He continued, “For a lot of people this is a job. Clock in, clock out. For [Bostian], it was more.”

In 2012, Bostian relocated again, this time to New York, where he had been accepted for training on the Northeast Corridor. He found an apartment in Forest Hills, Queens, a subway ride from Penn Station. Bostian spent several weeks riding shotgun with a veteran railroader, memorizing the hundreds of signal boxes, stops and junctions that line the corridor. Later, he took — and easily passed — the oral and written tests that certified him as a Northeast Corridor engineer.

Bostian was thrilled, colleagues recalled. Working in the sleepy Midwest or California might have fulfilled his childhood aspirations, but the Northeast Corridor, which connects Boston to New York and New York to Philadelphia and Washington, was where the action was. “My impression was that he had become who he always set out to be — in charge of the head end of a train on a major railroad,” one colleague says. “And having come that far, he wasn’t going to be distracted by anything.”

If elsewhere in the country train travel was increasingly an afterthought, here ridership was actually climbing, hitting its highest-ever level in 2014. The Brookings Institution has calculated that since Amtrak was cobbled together in 1970, out of track bought from a range of troubled rail companies, the company as a whole has been losing millions of dollars a year. By comparison, the Northeast Corridor, if spun off as an independent entity, would immediately be profitable.

And for very good reason: Of the 21,300 miles of rail operated by Amtrak, no other 225 are nearly as busy. The Northeast Corridor hosts not only Amtrak coaches and high-speed trains but also long freighters and smaller commuter trains (the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, or Septa, and New Jersey Transit trains). Volume is always heavy, with trains forever being diverted from one track to the next to accommodate faster or slower traffic. And no matter how quickly Amtrak dispatches maintenance crews, it is perpetually playing catch-up — the hard-used rails and switches require regular refurbishing. Engineers must be on the lookout not just for pedestrian trespassers on the rails, and errant cars and school buses and trucks at busy road crossings, but also for orange-jacketed work crews.

Finally, there is the challenge of the route itself, which juts and weaves and doglegs with exhausting regularity. Elsewhere in the country, long-haul engineers might be able to bring a train up to speed, level the master controller and skate for a hundred miles without making an adjustment. On the Northeast Corridor, even a moment’s inattention can be catastrophic. “It’s start, stop and start again,” Karl Edler, a veteran Northeast Corridor engineer, told me. “You’re constantly on guard; you’re constantly trying to think one step ahead.”

In much of Asia and Europe, engineers are protected by a technology known in the United States as positive train control, or P.T.C. Connected by digital radio waves or GPS signals, P.T.C. transponders in the track maintain constant contact with computers in the cabs of oncoming trains. If the transponders determine a train is traveling too fast, the locomotive’s brakes are triggered automatically. Amtrak has been working on its own in-house version of P.T.C., called the Advanced Civil Speed Enforcement System, or Acses, for almost a decade. But owing to insufficient funding and a row with the F.C.C., which Amtrak said had been slow to approve the use of the requisite radio bandwidth, its actual implementation has been piecemeal. At the time of the accident, large portions of the Northeast Corridor, including Frankford Junction, were not online. Practically speaking, that meant engineers were working with no safety net.

“I’ll describe it to you this way,” says Sarah Feinberg of the Federal Railroad Administration. “If a train is traveling in an area where P.T.C. isn’t in place and working as a backstop, you’ve got a situation where an engineer has to execute everything perfectly every hour, every day, every week. All the time. Because the slightest, smallest lapse can mean disaster.”

The afternoon of May 12 started typically enough for Bostian. The young engineer crossed the concourse at Penn Station and descended a short set of stairs to a warren of rooms under the departures board. Before the original Penn Station was demolished and replaced in the 1960s, all engineers took their orders from the men of the fourth-floor “movement bureau” and its squadron of telegraph machines. Today, the nerve center of Amtrak’s Manhattan operations is subterranean and decidedly more modern: The telegraph machines have been replaced by a bank of gleaming computers, displaying data from up and down the Northeast Corridor.

Bostian, still fairly new to the corridor and recently transferred to the New York-to-Washington run, wasn’t much for small talk or the ribbing through which railroaders leaven the stressful job. He jotted down his name on the sign-in register and went to pick up a stack of daily updates and instructions for his train from the crew room. Among the documents were the General Orders for the entire corridor — timetables, permanent speed requirements — as well as a series of Temporary Speed Restriction Bulletins, or T.S.R.B.s. After a crew briefing led by the conductor, he grabbed his safety glasses and walked down another flight of stairs to his waiting train.

The spring of 2015 was a fractious time for Northeast Corridor engineers. In March, over the objections of the unions, Amtrak had cut the time engineers were allowed between daily runs, from an average of roughly two and a half hours to, in many cases, 90 minutes or less. Amtrak employees foresaw disaster: “Forcing shorter breaks, day after day, between runs increases fatigue-related risk and the potential for loss of focus,” Edler, a member of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen, wrote in an open letter to Amtrak brass.

According to other engineers, Bostian’s “couplet” on May 12 — a run down to Washington and a run back to New York — was one of the routes affected. (Amtrak declined to comment on any changes to Bostian’s schedule but did say that “from time to time, [the company] revisits crew assignments to look for efficiencies, improve crew rest or to reflect changes in train operations.”) The new route had his Acela 2121 arriving at Union Station at 4:53 p.m. and, after a change of trains, pushing off at 7:10 onboard 188’s Cities Sprinter. If all went well, that would leave him roughly two hours in Washington.

But just minutes after the Acela 2121 left New York, Bostian encountered a problem with his “cab signals,” an internal device that automatically displays information about obstacles or other trains ahead. Without a functioning signaling device, Bostian was forced to reduce the top speed on the 2121, his eyes fixed on every wayside signal for indications of trouble ahead. It was an onerous task. He arrived at Union Station half an hour behind schedule. His actual break time — the time he would have to himself, to eat a sandwich or make a phone call — was all but obliterated, and an Amtrak colleague has since described a collective sense that Bostian was “frazzled” on arrival.

At around 6:40 p.m., he made his way to the ACS-64 Cities Sprinter that he would pilot north to New York. He settled into the engineer’s chair and double-checked the equipment: the radio, the video displays, the cab-signals device that failed him on his southbound leg. Everything seemed to be working well. At 7:10, Bostian received permission to depart, and 188 skated out of Union Station on schedule.

Like most trains in the Northeast Corridor, 188 had brought together a diverse and varied group of professionals: businessmen alongside consultants alongside graphic designers alongside start-up founders. In Car 3, Seyward Darby leaned her head against the window and watched the rail yards of Union Station flicker past. For the past year and a half, Darby had been commuting regularly between her apartment in Brooklyn and Washington, where she worked as an editor at Foreign Policy magazine. She hoped this would be her last train trip for a while: In June, she and her fiancé, Corey Sobel, a fiction writer, were to be married, and she was taking time off.

Outside, the dusk was gathering; the buildings lining the tracks gave off a cool glow. Darby opened her laptop and transcribed a few lines from a recent interview with the actor Ethan Hawke, who had been in Washington to promote a new movie on drone warfare. Amtrak 188 shuddered through northeast Maryland, stopping at New Carrollton at around 7:22.

As the train pulled away from Baltimore-Washington International Airport, Darby looked up to see a 20-year-old Navy midshipman named Justin Zemser making his way down the aisle, clad in his dress whites. Zemser was from Rockaway Beach, Queens, the only child of Howard Zemser, who worked in printing, and Susan Zemser, an assistant supervisor at an insurance company. When Zemser was a child, his uncle Richard used to kid that he was destined to be the first Jewish president. In high school, it stopped seeming like a joke: Zemser was the valedictorian of his class at Channel View School for Research, a star running back on the football squad and a regular volunteer at the local soup kitchen. After being accepted by Columbia, Cornell and Yale, he enrolled in the United States Naval Academy, and he was now a third class — the equivalent of a sophomore. Zemser was returning home from school, where he had been supporting friends participating in the annual Sea Trials, a rite of passage for plebes, as freshmen are known. The evening of May 12, he sent a text message to his uncle, telling him he would see him soon, and another to his mom. “Ma, don’t forget to put out my dinner,” he wrote.

Now Zemser stopped in front of Darby’s seat. “Is anyone sitting here, ma’am?” he asked. Darby shook her head and smiled. While he was situating himself, Zemser bumped Darby’s shoulder and elbow. He apologized and opened his own laptop. And for an hour or so, Darby and Zemser sat alongside each other like that, companionably and quietly.

Before Darby realized it, they were already in Philadelphia.

At around 9:17 p.m., Amtrak 188 went through North Philadelphia Station, sounding its bell once. The quadruple lights of the locomotive cut a ribbon through the night, past warehouses and overgrown lots. A few of the tire shops on East Erie Avenue were still open; plastic bags fluttered in the sagging concertina wire that lined the tracks.

If the Northeast Corridor is the most arduous route on the entire Amtrak network, then the three-mile stretch between North Philadelphia Station and the exit to Frankford Junction is among its most exacting sections. This is only in part because of the tight curve itself. Visibility here is also questionable (engineers say the trackside lighting is unpredictable), and trespassers are common. In the wake of the derailment of Amtrak 188, a new wrought-metal fence went up near Frankford Junction, but at the time, access to the tracks was as simple as lifting a scrap of chain-link fence. Even today, it’s not hard to reach the tracks if you want to; plenty of holes and gaps remain. A sergeant with the Philadelphia Police Department told me that the rail bed is popular with addicts and dealers. “And let me tell you,” he said, “you couldn’t build a fence high enough to keep them all out.”

All that foot traffic creates serious hazards for train engineers, who must worry not only about hitting pedestrians but also about being hit themselves, with debris or other hurled objects — an event railroaders describe as “getting rocked.” Familiar to engineers across the United States, rockings are especially common in the densely populated urban centers of the Northeast Corridor, where trespassers target trains for sport. It is not unusual, engineers say, to have two or three objects hit you over the course of a couplet. “Everyone in the Northeast has stories about it,” Edler told me. “After a while, the only ones that stand out are the instances where it’s really crazy, like a railroad spike used as a harpoon, or something.” At night, a rocked engineer has no time to prepare. He or she might be watching the track or monitoring the dashboard gauges, and then suddenly — with a pistol-shot crack — the heavy windshield is spiderwebbed or even caved in.

On the evening of May 12, at least two trains were struck by objects near Frankford Junction. One was a southbound Acela, which was reportedly hit at around 9:05 p.m. The other was a Septa train headed to Trenton. The Septa engineer, who called in the incident just minutes before 188 derailed, immediately put out a “hot track” warning, indicating to all oncoming trains that there was dangerous activity in the area.

According to an assistant conductor onboard Amtrak 188, who later spoke to the National Transportation Safety Board, Bostian heard the “hot track” warning and replied that he had been hit by something as well. By then, Bostian would have been opening up the throttle, preparing for the last straightaway before Frankford Junction.

It was a tricky series of maneuvers for even the most experienced engineer: speed up out of North Philadelphia Station; slow for a gradual curve at North Second Street; throttle open again for the straightaway, where the speed limit is 70 m.p.h.; and dump speed for the sharp 50-m.p.h. curve.

Instead, Amtrak 188 continued to accelerate on the straightaway — 90 miles per hour, 95. Near the entrance to the curve, it hit 106 m.p.h., more than twice the posted speed limit. At the last moment, Bostian activated the emergency brake, but it was too late: The 98-ton locomotive and the seven cars and the 250 terrified passengers were now traveling on their own momentum, free from the rails, lurching rightward into the earth and forward into the surrounding darkness.

In Car 3, the derailment was registered in a variety of ways. Josh Gotbaum, a scholar at the Brookings Institution and the former C.E.O. of the September 11th Fund, heard a screeching sound as the traction motors lost their grip. Beth Davidz, then a media technologist with the news site BillyPenn, saw the lights go dim and thought, This is not an ordinary bump. Vallen Graham, a research associate at Rockefeller University, was ejected from his seat and into the seat back in front of him, bruising his ribs.

Seyward Darby was reaching out to brace herself when Car 3, like Car 4 behind it and Car 2 ahead, landed on its right side. She had no time to think about Justin Zemser in the seat next to her — she had no time to think about anything. Without warning, she was airborne, and dirt was entering the coach in a great cloud. Hours later, at the hospital, she would still be scrubbing it from her face. She came to rest on her back, on the right side of the train, which was now the bottom of the train. Above her, she could see the windows that had once faced west. She did a quick inventory: Her limbs seemed to work. She wasn’t bleeding badly.

A few feet away, invisible to Darby in the smoke and dust, Graham was trying to get the other passengers organized. “If you have flashlights on your phone, please turn them on,” he shouted. Graham didn’t know a whole lot about trains, but he did know that trains like 188 ran on electric currents — the last thing anyone needed was to run into a live wire. Graham reached over to help up the passenger closest to him. “My head hurts,” the man said, and he ran a blood-smeared hand across a deep gash on his forehead.

They needed an escape route. The best exit looked to be the left-facing windows. Graham scrambled on top of a pile of broken seats and pulled out one of the panes. As the air turned smoky, Graham and Gotbaum worked together to evacuate as many passengers as they could, with Gotbaum supporting the passengers’ backs or bottoms and Graham hauling them upward from the lip of the window. It was an assembly line: one passenger, two passengers, three passengers — maybe eight in all, Darby among them.

Gotbaum made one more pass through the car, stopping in front of a woman who appeared to have been crushed by a loose seat. She was not moving. One of her legs protruded from the wreckage at a bizarre angle. There was nothing more that Gotbaum could do. The smoke was thickening; visibility was almost nil; his lungs were stinging. He headed for the window.

It is unlikely that even had he known to look for Justin Zemser, Gotbaum would have found him. According to a lawsuit filed by the Zemser family, Justin was launched from the train car as it overturned. His injuries included skull, sternum and spine fractures; cardiac lacerations; and a punctured aorta. A seat over, Darby would emerge with scrapes and bruises. Two bodies in motion, they followed radically different trajectories, governed by physics and maybe fate — Darby landing in a heap inside the train and Zemser ejected from it.

At around 11 p.m., Richard Zemser received a phone call from his brother Howard. Justin had been on the train that derailed in Philadelphia, and Howard hadn’t heard from him. “I thought, Well, maybe his phone is lost,” Richard told me. “But as the hours went by, it was clear to me something was wrong, because Justin was so close with his parents, and he would have found a way to get word home, even if it involved hunkering down and building a radio, like Marconi.”

Worried, Richard phoned a precinct house in Philadelphia. An officer there promised to call Richard if he heard anything. At around 6 a.m., the phone awoke Richard. Emergency medical workers had found Justin’s body, identified by his dress whites and name tag. Richard promised to notify his brother and his sister-in-law, and set down the receiver.

“I don’t often shed tears,” Richard recalled, “and so I measure my sadness by the size of the lump in my throat. I’m going to tell you right now, ever since I got that phone call, this damn lump has not stopped growing.”

Georgetta Gregory, the head of the N.T.S.B.’s railroad division, grew up in Arkansas, the daughter of a lifelong rail man. In 1974, at 19, she followed in her father’s footsteps and took her first railroad job; at 30, she became a dispatcher at Southern Pacific. There were few other women in the business then, but Gregory had grit and drive. She moved a lot: California, Colorado, then Georgia, where she was employed for three years at Marta, Atlanta’s municipal rail service.

It was in California that she oversaw her first cleanup after a derailment. “One thing you understand immediately is the phenomenal forces that take place during a railroad accident,” she said recently. “This is extremely large equipment, and it’s whipped around like empty matchboxes. I remember not being scared,” she went on, “but more in awe. Like, this is something to be respected.” Trains moved very quickly, she learned, until they didn’t. Unlike a capsized ship taking on water or a goose-struck airliner gliding to earth, trains almost always wrecked with awesome violence, loudly and fast.

Late on the evening of May 12, Gregory got word from an Amtrak contact about a massive derailment in Frankford Junction. It was too late to book a flight from Washington, so she and three investigators car-pooled to the crash site, arriving at the Conrail yard, on the southeast side of Frankford Junction, at 4 in the morning. The air was acrid with smoke, and through the trees, Gregory saw the flicker of the lights from the Philadelphia Fire Department trucks and ambulances. News helicopters thumped above the crash site.

The wreck appeared in segments: It was sprawled over too much ground to take in at once. The locomotive had detached from the rest of the train and shot 50 yards or so in an easterly direction, down a short embankment, before coming to a halt, its wheels mired deep in the wet dirt. Coaches 7, 6 and 5 were still upright. But Cars 4, 3 and 2 were overturned, and Car 1 — the business-class car — was so bent and crumpled as to be unrecognizable as a car at all.

In the harsh glare of the temporary light fixtures, hundreds of emergency medical workers were at work, escorting those who could walk to waiting police and E.M.T. vehicles and helping to carry those who could not. By dawn, hundreds of survivors were safe in local hospitals, and a grimmer phase of the recovery was underway. The names of the dead scrolled down TV screens across the country: Laura Finamore, Jim Gaines, Abid Gilani, Derrick Griffith, Rachel Jacobs, Giuseppe Piras. A day later, cadaver dogs found the remains of Robert Gildersleeve, a 45-year-old Maryland businessman, in the business-class car.

N.T.S.B. rail investigators are trained to minimize the amount of time they need on scene, so the process of debris removal and track repair can begin as quickly as possible — every day that a company can’t run trains on that track is considered to be a day squandered. Gregory and her team set about taking measurements of the cars and their trajectories and red-tagging any evidence, which would be transported to N.T.S.B. or Amtrak facilities for cataloging and three-dimensional scanning.

“It’s important to move fast, but it’s important to do some of the interviews, with the crew and passengers, when it’s fresh in their minds,” Gregory said. “And above all, you want to make sure you’ve got all the evidence that you’re going to need, that there’s nothing you’ve overlooked.”

After four days in Philadelphia, she returned to Washington, where the second — and more difficult — part of the investigation would begin.

Amtrak 188 was not the deadliest crash in company history: In 1993, 47 people died when the Miami-bound Sunset Limited careened off a bridge spanning a tributary of the Mobile River in Alabama. But that accident was quickly attributed to a barge strike that had misaligned the tracks. Most rail wrecks are that way: The cause is either obvious to investigators from the get-go or becomes obvious over the course of weeks — a collision with another train, a malfunctioning engine, a car stuck on the tracks. The fate of 188, by contrast, appeared to be a genuine mystery. There was no obvious cause, no readily apparent smoking gun.

At N.T.S.B. headquarters, a team of close to 20 investigators was convened. They broke into working groups, each of which was assigned an area to examine based on the expertise of its members, typically former railroad engineers or technicians. Over the next few weeks and months, a winnowing process occurred. Faulty signal boxes were dismissed as a possible contributing factor, as were track anomalies and major problems with the locomotive: Data from the black box showed the engine was working perfectly well right up to the moment of derailment.

Computer glitches have also been ruled out. On train message boards of the kind Bostian once frequented, some contributors linked to a report, published on the website of Trains magazine, concerning possible “screen freezes” on the ACS-64’s digital displays. Amtrak has said in a statement that it looked into the issue and found “no further reports of this occurring.”

Similarly, there was no collision with a train or an errant car or truck — 188 was definitely the only vehicle on the rails at Frankford Junction at 9:21 p.m. And although Bostian incurred a leg injury and a head wound requiring staples, his overall heath was good. He consented to a blood test that proved he did not have drugs or alcohol in his system, and he gave the N.T.S.B. investigators his smartphone and permission to look over his phone records. Bostian seemed far too conscientious to have deliberately taken his attention from the controls — no one I spoke to, official or colleague, would give any credence to the proposition that the accident was intentional.

Last summer, in the second month of the inquiry, I visited Robert Hall, the N.T.S.B.’s director of railroad, pipeline and hazardous-material investigations, at his office in Washington’s L’Enfant Plaza. Hall, who was wearing a tie depicting a scene from the Bayeux Tapestry, looked fatigued — the N.T.S.B. had recently announced there was no evidence that Bostian had used his phone directly before 188 wrecked. This announcement hurled the accident, and with it Hall’s team, straight back into the center of the news cycle. (The N.T.S.B. did find that Bostian dialed 911 on his phone after the crash.)

“We’ll get to the bottom of it,” Hall said, yanking at his tie. “Because, look, I don’t subscribe to acts of God. In any system, you’ve got humans making decisions, and those decisions have implications. I suppose you could decide not to design for something, and that omission ends up being the cause. Either way,” he continued, “human error is involved.”

In the first week of February, the N.T.S.B. will release the “docket” from the 188 investigation — a voluminous preliminary report comprising raw data from the train’s black box, imagery from the site and notes from investigators. Its ruling on the probable cause of the accident will most likely come this spring. Until then, the N.T.S.B. has declined to discuss its findings publicly. Still, in discussions with a range of rail officials — many of whom, citing the N.T.S.B. inquiry, declined to speak on the record — it appears clear that in the eyes of the N.T.S.B., the key to the wreck is something investigators call “lost situational awareness.”

There are two main schools of thought on what may have caused Bostian to lose his bearings. The first takes into account the rockings in the vicinity and Bostian’s own reported account of his train being struck by a large object, his forehead wounds and a small pocked dent on the left side of the windshield — a dent of the kind typically produced by a rock. “To me, it’s pretty clear what happened,” Richard Beall, the longtime accident investigator, told me. “Bostian’s got the throttle open to get the train up to speed. A projectile hits the windshield. Now the windshields on these locomotives are thick, but that impact is going to be out of nowhere and scary. As a human, you’ve got a tendency to duck. But he ducks into the dashboard and smacks his head, knocks himself out. And by the time he’s back up, and he’s reoriented himself, it’s: ‘Oh, crap.’?”

Of course, other engineers, struck by projectiles in exactly the same place on the Northeast Corridor, managed to keep their trains from overturning — a point that Beall willingly concedes. “It happens, it’s violent and terrifying, but you move on,” he told me. Which brings up the second, and not mutually exclusive, possibility. This situation takes place in the same time frame but has Bostian lost, confusing Frankford Junction with the curve before it and realizing his mistake only at the last moment. Several people involved in the investigation offered the analogy of a driver on a long and darkened freeway, mesmerized by the unending roll of asphalt. A kind of hypnosis takes over. The driver, fatigued, looks up to see his exit, but it’s already starting to pass, and the car swerves off the road at a dangerous speed. If Bostian had been rocked earlier in the trip, they said, this might have only added to his confusion, putting him on edge.

It’s easy to see: a rattled young engineer finishing the second leg of a frustrating couplet, aboard a racehorse of a high-powered locomotive he was still growing accustomed to. A notoriously tricky piece of track. And a moment of distraction at precisely the worst time.

Perhaps the most tragic aspect of the wreck of 188 is that it could have been avoided, or at least mitigated, had the right safeguard — positive train control — been in place. Renewed pressure has been brought to bear on the industry by P.T.C. advocates like Robert Sumwalt of the N.T.S.B. and Sarah Feinberg of the Federal Railroad Administration. (The agencies have been pushing for the technology for decades.) “My hope,” Feinberg told me recently, “is that the derailment was our long-overdue wake-up call that we need P.T.C. — that we owe it to passengers and rail staff to have it online.”

In late May, Joseph Boardman, Amtrak’s C.E.O. and president, promised that the installation of P.T.C. on the Northeast Corridor would be completed by the end of 2015, a pledge he has kept: Today, the system is active on all routes, with the exception of substantial stretches of track owned by the State of Connecticut. (A spokesman for the Connecticut Department of Transportation said it hoped to have P.T.C. installed on all state-owned track by 2018.)

It will be some time before a national rollout is complete. In November, President Obama signed into law an extension to the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008, giving railroad companies — which had complained about the cost of implementation — until 2020 to bring the technology online. On sections of rail not protected by P.T.C., “there is absolutely nothing to prevent what happened to Amtrak 188 from happening again,” Richard Beall told me. “Nothing.”

For many survivors of the accident, and for the families of the dead, the public discussion about safety technology has come too late. “I spend my days thinking about how this could have happened,” Howard Zemser told me when I spoke to him by phone earlier this year. “But look, Justin was never lost like other young men are — he had this incredible focus. He didn’t need to count on other people. He counted on himself and his own strength. He would want us to do the same thing.”

In September, Howard and Susan filed their lawsuit against Amtrak, asking for a jury trial and claiming that the company’s “negligent, careless, reckless” actions led to Justin’s death. They are not alone: Dozens of other families and individuals, including the conductor onboard 188, Emilio Fonseca, are suing Amtrak, which said in July that it will not fight claims for compensatory damages. (Congress has capped the amount of money Amtrak can pay out in any single accident at $295 million.)

Survivors, meanwhile, are relying on time to help the memory of the crash fade. Last June, Seyward Darby and Corey Sobel were married in an outdoor ceremony. “I’m so happy to be alive and here with you,” Darby said in her vows. On a recent trip to Europe, she rode a train again for the first time. But reminders of the crash are everywhere. Before the wedding, a large cardboard box arrived at Darby and Sobel’s apartment in Park Slope. Inside was Darby’s computer bag, which was recovered from the wreckage at Frankford Junction. “When I ripped the tape off and opened the flaps, the smell was immediately recognizable and upsetting,” Darby told me. “Like dirt, and metal, everything the train had smelled like after we derailed.” She stuffed the bag into the back of her closet and hasn’t used it since.

Investigators have zeroed in on the cause of the accident, but they may never fully comprehend Bostian’s state of mind on May 12. This is the last real mystery of the wreck of Amtrak 188 — a mystery only Bostian can help solve. And for now, he isn’t talking publicly: He did not answer multiple requests for comment, by phone and by email. He remains on unpaid administrative leave as he prepares for the year ahead.

If the N.T.S.B. finds him directly responsible for the derailment, he could be hit with criminal charges ranging from reckless endangerment to manslaughter. There is precedent: In the late 1980s, a Conrail engineer pleaded guilty to “recklessly causing the deaths of 16 people” after he ran a signal and collided with an Amtrak coach headed to Philadelphia.

Even if Bostian is wholly cleared by the N.T.S.B. and found not to have been negligent in his actions on May 12, it is very unlikely he’ll ever pilot a train again. This alone would be harsh punishment for a man who grew up wanting to do nothing else. His role in the accident — and the inaction that could have prevented it — continue to haunt those who know him best. “When I heard about the accident,” a college friend of Bostian’s told me, “my first thought was, I wish Brandon was driving that train, because it never would have crashed.”

The Advocate (LA) - Amtrak, officials taking tour for potential New Orleans to Orlando rail service
January 25, 2016

Amtrak and the Southern Rail Commission are conducting a tour along the Gulf Coast to consider new ideas for intercity passenger rail, the federal rail corporation said Monday.

The so-called Inspection Train will include 14 stops in four states, beginning Feb. 18 in New Orleans and concluding the next day in Jacksonville, Florida.

Amtrak President and CEO Joe Boardman will host elected officials, industry representatives, community leaders and federal stakeholders for the trip, which is being taken to examine the existing railroad infrastructure and to better understand rail’s economic, cultural and mobility opportunities.

The train will stop at each of the 14 locations for 10 minutes.

The commission recently released an Amtrak study that detailed the range of feasible service options and an analysis of ridership levels, projected revenues and related costs for passenger trains between New Orleans and Orlando.

NJ.com - Livingston man files suit over Amtrak derailment injuries
January 25, 2016
Tim Darragh

NEWARK — A Livingston man Monday became the latest victim of the Amtrak derailment last year in Philadelphia to sue over his injuries. 

Joshua Pearlstein of Livingston filed the lawsuit in New Jersey federal court, saying he sustained "serious, painful and permanent injuries" during the derailment, which occurred May 12, 2015, in the Port Richmond section of Philadelphia.

Pearlstein was a passenger on the Northeast Regional train traveling from Washington to Boston when it derailed.

Eight people died in the crash, which also injured about 200 others. 

Pearlstein's complaint also says his injuries required "significant medical treatment," but did not elaborate on the nature of the injuries or what treatment was required. 

The suit notes that Amtrak officials already have conceded that the train was traveling in excess of the allowable speed when it derailed.

According to Bloomberg News, Amtrak in court filings has said it will admit liability for compensatory damages, covering wrongful deaths, medical expenses, pain and suffering and lost wages.

Pearlstein's suit also seeks punitive damages to punish Amtrak for its "wanton disregard and reckless indifference" to safety when the derailment occurred. 

Investigators said the train accelerated on a section of track where it should have been decelerating, causing the incident. Amtrak has since completed installation of an automatic train control system in the Philadelphia area that, if it had been in place, would have automatically slowed the train. The train was traveling over 100 mph in a section of track where it should have been going no faster than 80 mph. 

Dozens of lawsuits have been filed against Amtrak over the crash. 

The cases are being consolidated and are being assigned to one federal judge in Philadelphia. 

Amtrak officials did not immediately respond to messages seeking comment.

NORTHEAST CORRIDOR
Home
Delaware Online - Comment period for expanded rail service extended
January 25, 2016
Karl Baker

Rail supporters and opponents will have until Feb. 15 to share their opinions with the Federal Railroad Administration about the future of passenger train travel in the Northeast, the agency announced Monday.

It extended its comment period by two weeks for proposals to expand rail service between Washington and Boston. Proposed projects are bundled into one of three alternative construction packages ranging in cost from $65 billion to $290 billion over three decades. The FRA will announce which bundle it chooses before the summer and will then draw up a blueprint for the preferred alternative by spring 2017.

Projects being considered for Delaware include new train stations in Newport and Edgemoor, a rebuilt station and tracks in Newark and a rail bypass around Wilmington.

The FRA held 11 public hearings throughout the Northeast during the previous two months, including one in Wilmington on Jan. 20.

SEPTA's Wilmington, Newark line uses the Northeast Corridor. Amtrak's only profitable route also uses the tracks, as well as four freight railroads.

Those interested can send comments to the FRA online at www.necfuture.com, by email at comment@necfuture.com, or by mail to NEC FUTURE, U.S. DOT Federal Railroad Administration, One Bowling Green, Suite 429, New York, NY 10004.

Philly.com - Extended public comment period for Northeast rail corridor options
January 25, 2016
Jason Laughlin

The public will get an additional two weeks to comment on the long-term plans for the Northeast rail corridor that propose major changes for the route's path through Philadelphia.

The comment period for the draft environmental impact statement was extended from Jan. 30 to Feb. 15 due to heavy interest from the public, Federal Railroad Administration officials said. The NEC Future long term plan offers three visions for the 457-mile corridor between Washington D.C. and Boston, and among the proposals are Amtrak service to Philadelphia International Airport and Center City.

The proposals mark the beginnings of the first long range plan for the heavily traveled route in nearly 40 years. The plans can be seen at necfuture.com. Anyone interested in making comment can email comment@necfuture.com or write to NEC FUTURE, U.S. DOT Federal Railroad Administration, One Bowling Green Suite 429, New York, NY, 10004.

STATE BY STATE
Home
Battle Creek Enquirer (MI) - City moves on $3.5 million downtown rail quiet zone
January 25, 2016

Battle Creek has moved forward on a $3.5 million effort to create a three-mile railroad quiet zone in the downtown area.

Trains would traverse 11 rail crossings in the city's center without sounding their horns once the city installs advanced crossing barriers.

The city administration announced Monday it had filed a notice of intent for the quiet zone with the Federal Railroad Administration.

Part of the process would involve permanently blocking the current crossings at Fountain, Division and Spencer streets. Those road closures would be voted on Feb. 2 by the City Commission, the city said in a news release.

The tracks were purchased by the state in 2012 from Norfolk Southern.

“The Quiet Zone will significantly improve the quality of life for many of our residents, as well as those enjoying our newly transformed downtown, whether they work there or are just visiting," city Transportation Director Larry Bowron said in the news release.

The city had included the quiet zone in its Capital Improvement Plan last year and has set aside $3.5 million in bond funding for the work.

Completion of the project is targeted for the end of 2016. When the quiet zone takes effect, trains would routinely travel without sounding their horns between the grade-level crossing at Forest Street, west of downtown, and the east city limits.

The Times Picayne (LA) - John Bel Edwards talks light rail, New Orleans airport ramp with transportation secretary
January 25, 2016
Julia O”Donoghue

No money was promised, but Gov. John Bel Edwards met personally Friday (Jan. 22) with U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx to talk about several transportation projects in south Louisiana. Edwards was in D.C. at the end of last week for the annual Washington Mardi Gras celebration. 

"We got a commitment that we are going to work together," Edwards spokesman Richard Carbo said. "We presented a list" of transportation projects. 

Specifically, Edwards and Louisiana transportation Secretary Shawn Wilson requested $100 million to do some work on Interstate 10 between Baton Rouge and Lafayette. If they get the federal funding, it would free state money allocated for the project to be used for other things. 

Wilson said the additional cash would make $30 million available to study a commuter rail project from Baton Rouge to New Orleans and improving existing railroad crossings. Carbo said Federal Railroad Administration officials are planning to come to Louisiana in February. 

If it received additional federal funding, the state would also have $10 million to put toward building a new off-ramp for the airport exit off Interstate 10 at Loyola Avenue in Kenner. It could also devote $20 million toward the widening of Interstate 10 at Washington Street in Baton Rouge, Wilson said in an interview. 

Edwards -- and possibly Baton Rouge Mayor Kip Holden -- discussed the bottleneck at Washington Street with President Barack Obama directly when he visited Baton Rouge earlier this month. Obama's staff then followed up with Edwards the next day, saying they might be able to find $100 million in funding to help fix the problem, according to the governor. 

But again, no solid commitment for funding has been made yet.





3


