 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 21, 2016
TV & RADIO
FRA says it will take a close look at any mega-merger of rail operations	2
FRA says no tolerance no, no exception	2
FRA steps up enforcement	2
Railroad safety in Montana topic of roundtable discussion	2
METRA to have PTC up and running by mid-year	3
LIRR service suspended for second time this morning	3
Second train-vs-car accident in two weeks	3
16 year old killed on tracks in Slidell, LA	3
NATIONAL NEWS
The Hill - Feds tout collection of $15 billion in railway fines	3
CTPost (CT) - Railroad fines at record levels	4
Progressive Railroading - FRA collects highest civil penalty rate for rail safety violations	5
MassTransit - FRA Sees Its Highest Ever Penalty Collection Rate	6
CTPost (CT) - NTSB Most Wanted List Underlines Importance of SafeRail Congress	6
Crain's Chicago Business (IL) - Railroad focuses on Chicago congestion to win merger support	8
PTC
The Daily Herald (IL) - Many Metra trains could have new braking system by end of year	9
NBC5 Chicago (IL) - New Crash-Prevention Braking System to Begin Operation in Select Metra Trains	11
RAIL INCIDENTS
Contra Costa Times (CA) - Martinez: Train derailment near Benicia Bridge rekindles safety fears along East Bay's refinery belt	11
Associated Press (LA) - Train kills teen wearing headphones, walking to school	13
The Chicago Tribune (IL) - Minor injuries, delays after Metra train hits vehicle near Hometown	13
Idaho Statesman (ID) - Nyssa woman cited after train hits her car in Boise	14
Melrose Patch (MA) - Pedestrian Train Collision, Property Taxes, Winter Weather: Top Melrose News	14
PIX11 (NY) - Portion of LIRR Ronkonkoma branch suspended again after crash	15
HHFT
The Washington Post (DC) - Safety board targets tank car explosion risk	16
AMTRAK
The New York Times (NY) - Amtrak Says New York Region’s Rail Projects Could Cost Up to $23.9 Billion	18
STATE BY STATE
Associated Press (MT) - Chairman open to removing rail safety oversight from PSC	19
CTPost (CT) - Metro-North workers get hotline for rail safety tips	20
Progressive Railroading - Metro-North to implement 'close call' reporting system	21
Star Tribune (MN) - After 7 years, Lakeville residents fight rail storage in backyards	22
Delaware Online (DE) - Feds considering new train tracks, stations in Delaware	24
Pierce City Herald (WI) - Highway 10 underpass option approved	25
Miami News Times (FL) - Florida Train Deaths Likely To Rise As All Aboard Florida, Tri-Rail Expand	27


TV & RADIO
Home
FRA says it will take a close look at any mega-merger of rail operations
KMPH-FRES (FOX) - Fresno, CA

FRA says no tolerance no, no exception
WGN - Chicago, IL

FRA steps up enforcement
KSTP-MIN (ABC) - Minneapolis, MN

Railroad safety in Montana topic of roundtable discussion
KXLH (CBS) - Helena, MT

METRA to have PTC up and running by mid-year
WBBM-CHI (CBS) - Chicago, IL

LIRR service suspended for second time this morning
WINS-AM - New York, NY

Second train-vs-car accident in two weeks 
WBBM-CHI (CBS) - Chicago, IL

16 year old killed on tracks in Slidell, LA
WDSU-NO (NBC) - New Orleans, LA


NATIONAL NEWS
Home
The Hill - Feds tout collection of $15 billion in railway fines
January 20, 2016
Keith Laing

The U.S. government collected $15 billion in fines from railway companies in 2015 as the Federal Railroad Administration achieved a record 75 percent collection rate for penalties, Obama administration officials said Wednesday. 

The FRA said the collection rate last year is a six percent increase over 2014 and also the highest percentage of penalties that were paid in its history. 

The agency attributed the increase to "stepped-up" enforcement of federal regulations after the Obama administration and rail companies came under fire for a series of passenger and freight accidents in recent years. 

“Safety must be the number one priority for every railroad, and the Department of Transportation will continue to take aggressive action against railroads who fail to follow safety rules,” Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said in a statement. 

“A strong safety enforcement program is critical to prevent accidents, save lives and move our country forward,” he continued. 

The FRA has been under fire from lawmakers after multiple passenger and freight-train accidents involving Amtrak and New York Metro-North trains and oil tankers have raised questions about rail safety.  

Lawmakers who have been critical of the rail industry's safety record gave the FRA credit for the increase in the collection rate of fines that were imposed in 2015, but they said the payment percentage should be closer to 100 percent. 

“Under the fresh leadership of Administrator Sarah Feinberg, FRA has taken a step in the right direction as it cracks down on safety violations – progress from past years of anemic enforcement," Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) said in a statement. 

"But a 75-percent recovery rate is still woefully low, allowing violators to skate by, unconcerned with the ramifications of failure to pay fines in full," he continued. "To ensure the safety of our rails, FRA must be pursuing more robust fines, while never resting until it recovers all of the penalties it levies. I will keep pushing FRA to make this new level of accountability a reality.” 

Railroads have maintained that they were focused on safety in 2015, despite their high-profile push for a delay in a mandate for automating trains with technology that safety groups have said would reduce the risk of accidents on the nation's railways. 

“America’s freight rail industry has a 24/7 focus on safety, it is an ongoing priority to make the nation’s rail system even safer," the Association of American Railroads (AAR) said in a statement that was provided to The Hill.

"Federal statistics show rail safety has been dramatically improving over the last several decades with freight railroads continuously taking action to enhance safe train operations, including ongoing operational reviews, increased track inspections and the use of trackside technology,” the group that lobbies for railroads in Washington continued.  

FRA Administrator Sarah Feinberg said Wednesday that her agency will continue cracking down on railroads that violate federal safety laws and regulations. 

"Setting a record for collections is an important milestone, but it is just one element of FRA’s broader effort to achieve a safer rail system,” she said. “As we continue to aggressively enforce safety regulations, FRA will also continue to implement new, innovative solutions to increase safety.”

CTPost (CT) - Railroad fines at record levels
January 20, 2016
Bill Cummings

The Federal Railroad Administration says stepped-up enforcement of railroad safety regulations has led to the highest civil penalty collection rate in the agency’s 50-year history.

During 2015, the agency collected 75 percent of all civil penalties issued to railroads for violating federal safety regulations - a six percent increase over 2014, and the largest percentage rate ever collected by the agency.

The total amount of civil penalties in FY2015, $15 million, increased by 12 percent compared to the previous year.

“Safety must be the number one priority for every railroad, and the Department of Transportation will continue to take aggressive action against railroads who fail to follow safety rules,” said U.S Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx. “A strong safety enforcement program is critical to prevent accidents, save lives and move our country forward.”

U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn, praised FRA for stepping up enforcement but said a 75 percent collection rate is too low.

“A 75-percent recovery rate is still woefully low, allowing violators to skate by, unconcerned with the ramifications of failure to pay fines in full,” Blumenthal said.

“To ensure the safety of our rails, FRA must be pursuing more robust fines, while never resting until it recovers all of the penalties it levies,” Blumenthal said. “I will keep pushing FRA to make this new level of accountability a reality.”

Still, Blumenthal conceded “FRA has taken a step in the right direction as it cracks down on safety violations - progress from past years of anemic enforcement.”

Progressive Railroading - FRA collects highest civil penalty rate for rail safety violations
January 20, 2016

The Federal Railroad Administration's (FRA) stepped-up enforcement of railroad safety regulations has led to the highest-ever civil penalty collection rate in the agency's history, FRA officials announced today.

For fiscal-year 2015, the agency will collect 75 percent of all civil penalties for violating federal safety regulations, a 6 percent increase over FY2014. The agency collected $15 million in FY2015, a 12 percent increase over the previous year, according to an FRA press release.

The increase in civil penalty collections is an indication of the FRA's efforts to improve railroad safety by more stringent enforcement of regulations.

Last year, more than 6,485 railroad company violations resulted in civil penalties. The largest percentage of the violations — 29 percent — was for motive power and equipment violations; the second highest — 26 percent — was for track violations. Hazmat violations came in third at 20 percent.

"Setting a record for collections is an important milestone, but it is just one element of FRA's broader effort to achieve a safer rail system," said FRA Administrator Sarah Feinberg. "As we continue to aggressively enforce safety regulations, FRA will also continue to implement new, innovative solutions to increase safety."

The FRA's full report can be found here.

MassTransit - FRA Sees Its Highest Ever Penalty Collection Rate 
January 20, 2016

The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) on Jan. 20, announced that its stepped-up enforcement of railroad safety regulations led to the highest-ever civil penalty collection rate in the agency’s 50-year history. 

For Fiscal Year (FY) 2015, the agency will collect 75 percent of all civil penalties it issued to railroads for violating federal safety regulations – a six percent increase over FY2014, and the largest percentage rate ever collected by the agency. The total amount of civil penalties in FY2015, $15 million, increased by 12 percent compared to the previous year.

“Safety must be the number one priority for every railroad, and the Department of Transportation will continue to take aggressive action against railroads who fail to follow safety rules,” said U.S Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx. “A strong safety enforcement program is critical to prevent accidents, save lives and move our country forward.”

FRA’s collection rate is the highest in the agency’s history and significantly higher than previous years.

In 2015, more than 6,485 railroad company violations resulted in civil penalties. The largest portion of those violations, 29 percent, was for motive power and equipment violations, followed by 26 percent for track violations. 

“Setting a record for collections is an important milestone, but it is just one element of FRA’s broader effort to achieve a safer rail system,” said FRA Administrator Sarah E. Feinberg. “As we continue to aggressively enforce safety regulations, FRA will also continue to implement new, innovative solutions to increase safety.”

The stepped-up enforcement of safety regulations is part of the Federal Railroad Administration’s larger, comprehensive effort to increase safety of the nation’s rail system. Administrator Feinberg has also prioritized railroad crossing safety, improving the safety of hazmat and crude transport, increasing transparency and working more closely with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).

CTPost (CT) - NTSB Most Wanted List Underlines Importance of SafeRail Congress
January 20, 2016
Bill Cummings

The recent release of the National Transportation Safety Board's (NTSB) annual Most Wanted list has once again shone a spotlight upon rail safety in the US.

The list, described as a 'road map from lessons learned to lives saved', has a major focus on technology and its role in improving safety. The top ten includes several rail specific requests, including a renewed push for the implementation of positive train control (PTC), an improvement of rail transit safety oversight, and changes to rail tank car management.

These are all key themes at the upcoming SafeRail (incorporating the 6th annual PTC World Congress) coming to Washington DC, US on March 22-23 2016. Christopher A. Hart, Chairman of the NTSB, is a lead speaker and will be discussing in further detail the key priorities for transit safety in the USA.

As the NTSB Most Wanted list has shown, safety on US railroads remains a key concern for all stakeholders. Increasingly, operators are looking for whole-system reliability but to achieve this key financial, strategic and technical challenges must be overcome.

While the extension of the PTC mandate gives operators breathing space on their deployment, it also offers more time to take advantage of rapidly evolving IT that provide the extra opportunities this makes available.

Responding to these changing market opportunities, and based on a five-year track record of hosting the world's leading PTC World Congress, comes SafeRail, a two-day Congress taking place where the crucial transit safety decisions are made.

A unique blend of keynotes, masterclasses, roundtables and panel discussions, SafeRail is the must-attend event for all stakeholders involved in the safety and operational efficiency on the US Rail Network.

Attendees include a full range of experts involved in mandates and policy, compliance and regulation, project planning and delivery, signalling upgrades and operational performance. This includes CEOs, department chiefs, safety directors, signalling and communications experts and technology specialists.

SafeRail is completely free to attend for railroads, transit agencies and government, and will bring together over 40 high-level speakers and 100s of senior level attendees to discuss and discover how to exploit these opportunities and ensure safety, security and operational efficiency on your network.

Chairman Hart will be joined by Yves Desjardins-Siciliano (CEO, VIA Rail Canada), Mike Marino, Director / General Manager (Port Authority of NY & NJ (PATH)), Jeff Moller (AVP Safety, AAR), Keith Holt (deputy chief engineer communications and signals, Amtrak), Lisa McGowan, (general manager operations integration, CSX), and many more experts in rail safety and PTC from the government and business sectors.

Crain's Chicago Business (IL) - Railroad focuses on Chicago congestion to win merger support
January 20, 2016
Micah Maidenberg

Canadian Pacific Railway is emphasizing Chicago track congestion in a ramped-up effort to persuade Norfolk Southern shareholders and railroad regulators to approve a merger of the two companies.

In a report released today, the Alberta-based railroad says that if it completes its hostile bid to merge with Norfolk, it could shift at least some freight traffic to places such as Buffalo, N.Y.; Elkhart, Ind.; and Kansas City, Mo., avoiding the Chicago area.

Canadian Pacific spokesman Martin Cej declined to discuss how a merger would affect the number of local jobs, other than to say less congestion in the region for other carriers is a “net-net improvement” for the broader economy and job creation.

But some positions could be lost if the companies merge. Canadian Pacific has employees at its Bensenville intermodal yard, while Norfolk has intermodal facilities in Englewood, on 106th Street on the Southeast Side and elsewhere in the region.

Norfolk Southern, which is fighting the proposed merger, rejects Canadian's assertion that a combination would ease traffic jams that form as several freight railroads, Amtrak and Metra try to move around and through the region.

DISAGREEMENT ON CONGESTION RELIEF

James Clements, vice president of strategic planning and transportation services at Canadian Pacific, acknowledges that both sides “don't even agree on the basic set of facts.” Canadian Pacific thinks at least four or five trains a day could be diverted from the area if the firms combine, he said.

That's significantly more than Norfolk's estimates. Last month, James Squires, CEO of the Norfolk, Va.-based railroad, said less than one train per day of current traffic from both firms would shift out of the area.

But Canadian Pacific says in the new report that the larger company could build “manifest trains,” or trains with cars heading in the same direction but to different destinations, in Norfolk's yard in Elkhart rather than here.

Canadian Pacific also could skip Chicago by routing traffic from eastern Canada or the northeast U.S. through Detroit and down to Kansas City, according to its report. Buffalo would become a more important “gateway” for trains heading east, the report says, handling work now completed in Chicago.

The rail bottleneck in Chicago is a function of the region's position in the center of the North American freight network. The area has nearly 3,900 miles of track and more than 50 freight yards, and it handles the movement of 1,300 freight and passenger trains each day, according to the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning.

FREIGHT PROJECTION

The volume of freight moving through the area is expected to rise 62 percent between 2007 and 2040 to more than 1 billion tons annually, according to the agency.

Canadian Pacific says merging with Norfolk Southern would allow it to create capacity here as it shifts operations elsewhere, opening room for other freight railroads, Amtrak and Metra.

In its report, the firm says the Chicago Region Environmental and Transportation Efficiency Program—the rail infrastructure effort known as Create—is insufficient for reducing congestion.

The planning agency, which has supported Create, said in a statement, “Freight volumes will keep rising in decades to come, combined with projected growth in commuter and intercity passenger rail. Now is not the time to lose our regional focus on building capacity through both infrastructure improvements and operational efficiencies.”

The agency added that the new federal transportation bill could help launch a series of improvements at one rail bottleneck, near 75th Street on the South Side.

The battle over the proposed merger is the talk of the railroad industry. Last week, at the Midwest Association of Rail Shippers conference in Lombard, the CEO of Union Pacific said the firms will do “everything in our power” to fight big mergers in the rail sector.

Meanwhile, Canadian Pacific yesterday asked the U.S. Justice Department to look into a “collective campaign” by large railroads to block its hostile bid for Norfolk Southern.

The company said it sent a letter to inform the U.S. government of the “unprecedented action of major competitors organizing to block a new entrant from enhancing competition,” according to a statement.

PTC
Home
The Daily Herald (IL) - Many Metra trains could have new braking system by end of year 
January 20, 2016
Marni Pyke

A crash-prevention braking system should start operating on one of Metra's most heavily used routes by the end of the year, executives said Wednesday in a presentation about 2016 goals.

The BNSF Line would be the first to provide positive train control, followed by Metra's three Union Pacific Lines.

Commuter and freight railroads successfully lobbied to extend a 2015 federal deadline for PTC, which can automatically stop a train when a crash is imminent or speeding threatens a derailment.

"If testing goes good, by the end of the year ... keeping our fingers crossed, Metra and the BNSF will have that line in operation with positive train control," Chief Engineering Officer Bruce Marcheschi said during a presentation to the Sandhouse Rail Group, which is affiliated with the Northwestern University Transportation Center.

Union Pacific is expected to start testing its PTC system in late 2016.

Metra-operated routes, including the Milwaukee District and North Central Lines, are about 30 percent complete and should be PTC-compliant by mid-2017. The agency is expected to pay from $350 million to $400 million.

The technology is so new, there are a lot of bugs to work out, Marcheschi said, noting that railroads testing the system have seen a 30 percent error rate.

"Would you go on an airplane that had 30 percent errors?" he asked. "Probably not. So, there's a lot of work that needs to be done."

Other improvements include debuting a free Wi-Fi car on each of Metra's 11 lines as a pilot program this month, CEO Don Orseno said.

"Is it going to be successful for our customers or is it something that crashes all the time?" Orseno said. "We also want to know if it's financially feasible."

Orseno also noted upgrades will continue on the Ventra app, an smartphone ticketing app, which was used for the millionth ride Tuesday after going live in November.

For commuters tired of drafty cars and antiquated seats, the railroad is incrementally rehabbing its cars and locomotives. Out of 176 Amerail cars, 133 are fixed but just three out of 41 of the older "Budd" cars are updated, Chief Mechanical Officer Jim Derwinski said.

Seven out of 68 locomotives have been modernized.

This year Metra also expects to ask firms to submit proposals to conduct a comprehensive study of its fares, which are distance-based.

"Do we have too many zones or too few zones? Should we have a common fare like the CTA?" Orseno asked.

NBC5 Chicago (IL) - New Crash-Prevention Braking System to Begin Operation in Select Metra Trains
January 20, 2016
Emily Florez

PTC is a sophisticated technology system combining GPS, radio communications, and computers, to monitor the location and speeds of trains, in relation to other trains, signals, and changing speed limits

Metra will soon begin testing a new braking system designed to prevent crashes and derailments.

The new crash-prevention braking system could start operating on one of the most traveled Metra routes by the end of the year. The BNSF Line would be the first to provide positive train control, or PTC, followed by Metra’s three Union Pacific Lines, according to the Daily Herald.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Contra Costa Times (CA) - Martinez: Train derailment near Benicia Bridge rekindles safety fears along East Bay's refinery belt
January 20, 2016
Nate Gartrell and David DeBolt

MARTINEZ -- Three tank cars carrying a hazardous liquid derailed Wednesday morning on train tracks under the Benicia Bridge, and although there were no reports of leaks, the incident rekindled fears about the potential dangers of derailments along the East Bay's industrial and refinery belt.

"Thank God there were no leaks. We may have dodged a bullet here, but it does bring up that discussion again about hazardous materials," Martinez Mayor Rob Schroder said.

Cities throughout the Bay Area have expressed concern over the past year about the possibility of derailments and explosions in their communities, particularly in light of growing shipments of crude by rail nationally and several high-profile derailments in North America. The East Bay is laced by five oil refineries, all located near dense population centers.

Wednesday's derailment involving rail cars carrying sulfuric acid happened at about 8 a.m. along Mococo Road, across the tracks from Marina Vista Avenue, as the train was headed to Eco Services in Martinez, said Matt Kaufmann, assistant director of hazardous materials for Contra Costa County.

The sulfuric acid contained contaminated hydrocarbon, but none of the materials spilled, Kaufmann said.

Union Pacific Railroad also took air samples and found no vapors were released from the trains, according to Francisco Castillo, the railroad's director of public affairs.

"Sulfuric acid is highly dangerous and toxic," said Contra Costa County Supervisor John Gioia, of Richmond, who also sits on the Bay Area Air Quality Management District board. "Had there been a leak, it would have been worse. That's why I call it a near miss."
Advertisement

Union Pacific workers delivered the shipment of 20 rail cars on Monday evening from its tracks to an industry line used by Eco Services, officials said.

It is unclear what caused the derailment and where the train began its journey to Eco Services, which frequently receives similar shipments from nearby refineries.

The company removes hydrocarbon from sulfuric acid that occurs during the refining process, Kaufman said. Shell Oil and Tesoro each have refineries within a mile of the company.

By 9:30 a.m., Contra Costa County Hazardous Materials crews were on scene, along with scores of Union Pacific employees, but the cars remained derailed, including one that was tilted all the way on its side. Officials were waiting for a crane to arrive to move the tank cars back onto the tracks.

Between January 2012 and October 2015, 4,321 train derailments -- more than three per day on average -- were reported in the United States, according to Federal Railroad Administration data.

This incident also raises the issue of local control over railroad activities; cities such as Martinez "have absolutely no control over the rail lines or what is shipped through our communities," Schroder said. In the East Bay's case, Schroder said, U.S. Representatives Mike Thompson, D-Napa, and Mark DeSaulnier, D-Concord, have been "very proactive" in dealing with railroad safety issues.

Although the tankers weren't carrying crude oil, anti-crude-by-rail activists around the Bay Area say this incident is a reminder of the potential dangers in transporting explosive materials by train.

"These kind of derailments are an example that our community and all the up-rail communities would be in grave danger if crude-by-rail projects are approved," said Andres Soto of the environmental group Benicians for a Safe and Healthy Community. "We're so glad that (the WesPac oil terminal project) was taken off the table in Pittsburg recently. ... These trains go under bridges, and if there was an explosion, the volatility involved could destroy those bridges. It's a regional issue."

In recent years, several proposed crude-by-rail projects have sparked contentious debates around the Bay Area and nationally. Some of these concerns started after a July 2013 disaster in Canada, when a train carrying more than 70 crude oil cars derailed, causing a massive explosion in a Quebec town that killed 47 people and ultimately cost the Canadian Pacific railroad company nearly $450 million in a legal settlement with the victims' families.

Last year, anti-crude-by-rail activists in Pittsburg celebrated when the WesPac oil terminal project, which originally envisioned unloading as many as five 104-car oil trainloads a week, was taken off the table. In Benicia, a similar controversy surrounds a Valero proposal to deliver crude by rail to its refinery there. Residents opposed to the project are planning to voice their opposition at a Feb. 8 Benicia Planning Commission meeting, Soto said.

Currently, tank cars used to transport crude oil can puncture from impacts of less than 10 miles per hour, although the U.S. Department of Transportation is in the process of adopting more stringent standards for such cars, according to Jackie Prange, a staff attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council.

"The concern is that had this been a crude oil train, it's much more likely that the tank cars would have punctured," Prange said.

Contact Nate Gartrell at 925-779-7174 or follow him at Twitter.com/NateGartrell. Contact David DeBolt at 510-208-6453 or follow him at Twitter.com/daviddebolt. 

Associated Press (LA) - Train kills teen wearing headphones, walking to school
January 20, 2016

SLIDELL, La. (AP) — Slidell police say a freight train hit and killed a 16-year-old boy who was using headphones while walking to school along the middle of the tracks.

A police spokesman, Sgt. Daniel Seuzeneau (soo-zuh-NOH'), identifies him as James Pulsifer of Slidell.

He says the Norfolk Southern train's conductor told investigators that Pulsifer was wearing headphones, and clearly did not hear the train's whistle.

Seuzeneau says the conductor told police he did all he could to stop and to get the youth's attention.

The train was heading south when the accident occurred about 7 a.m. Wednesday.

The Chicago Tribune (IL) - Minor injuries, delays after Metra train hits vehicle near Hometown 
January 20, 2016

Service was delayed after a train on Metra's Southwest Service line struck a vehicle Wednesday morning near 87th Street and Pulaski Road, on the border of Chicago and Hometown, according to Metra's website.

The driver of the vehicle suffered minor injuries and was transported to a hospital, according to Hometown police. No other injuries were reported.

Trains were stopped for a while in both directions after the collision and later were delayed, according to the website.

Hometown police Chief Chuck Forsyth said the vehicle was rear-ended by another vehicle. The collision "pushed the one vehicle onto the tracks."

The incident is near where a collision between at Metra train and a vehicle killed two people in late December.

The tracks cut right through the intersection of 87th and Pulaski. Southwest Highway, which becomes Columbus Avenue in Chicago, also runs diagonally near the intersection.

Forsyth said train collisions with vehicles have been rare in recent years.

"We haven't had an incident there in my 12 years as chief, until the last two — 12 years of nothing then two in one month," he said. "Really, the weather is a factor in both."

He said the first one involved snow and sleet and the most recent one involved light snow.

Idaho Statesman (ID) - Nyssa woman cited after train hits her car in Boise 
January 20, 2016

Boise police said Marketa Bachini, 74, was driving south on Milwaukee Street near Franklin Road when she stopped her car on the tracks around 10:30 a.m..

An oncoming freight train hit the four-door sedan. Bachini, the only person in the car, escaped injury, police said.

Police initially reported the driver had jumped out of the car before the train hit it, but later corrected that information. Bachini was cited for stopping on railroad tracks, police said.

The tracks are just north of the Franklin/Milwaukee stoplight.

Traffic was blocked on Milwaukee from Franklin to Westpark Street for about an hour while police investigated the crash. The track was cleared around 11:45 a.m.

    Reports are now that female driver was only occupant of the car, she was in the car but thankfully not injured pic.twitter.com/Zf2PLtmXga

Melrose Patch (MA) - Pedestrian Train Collision, Property Taxes, Winter Weather: Top Melrose News
January 20, 2016
Joe Lipovich

MELROSE, MA—Tragedy struck Melrose this week as a Melrose High School student may have fallen victim to a fatal train accident.

Melrose High School principal Marianne Farrell informed members of the community Wednesday that a student may have been involved in a fatal collision with a Haverhill Line train. The Medical Examiner’s office has yet to confirm the identity.

A link to the story can be found here: MBTA Pedestrian Collision: Victim Likely Melrose High Student

That’s not all that happened this week, here are some other top stories from Melrose Patch. 

PIX11 (NY) - Portion of LIRR Ronkonkoma branch suspended again after crash
January 20, 2016
Samantha Tata

LONG ISLAND — A portion of the Ronkonkoma branch was suspended in both directions to start the Thursday morning commute because of a vehicle being struck by a train, which was then disabled, according to Long Island Rail Road officials.

The collision happened east of the Pinelawn station.

The car was when empty when it was hit by the train, Suffolk County police said. The driver ran from the vehicle as the train approached about 6:30 a.m. and was not hurt, police said.

Trains are not running between Ronkonkoma and Farmingdale, the agency said in an update shortly before 8 a.m.

At 7:30 a.m., service was restored in both directions with delays averaging 45 minutes, the transit agency said. But soon after, suspensions were again in effect because the train that struck the car was disabled in single-track territory.

Commuters are urged to use alternate branches, such as the Montauk and Port Jefferson lines, to get around the suspension.

For real-time updates on the status of your train, click here.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

HHFT
Home
The Washington Post (DC) - Safety board targets tank car explosion risk
January 20, 2016
Ashley Halsey III



The risk of a disastrous tank car explosion in a major city and preventing tragedies like last year’s fatal Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia dominated the discussion last week as the National Transportation Safety Board issued its priorities for 2016.

The NTSB sent a stern message to Congress and federal regulators about the potential consequences of delays in installing automatic-braking technology to prevent high-speed derailments and in replacing tank cars that carry volatile flammable loads.

NTSB Chairman Christopher Hart invoked the memory of a runaway train that derailed in flames in Lac-Megantic, Quebec, in 2013, killing 47 people and burning down more than 30 buildings.

“We’ve been lucky thus far that derailments involving flammable liquids in America have not yet occurred in a populated area,” Hart said as the list was revealed on Wednesday. “But an American version of Lac-Megantic could happen at any time. Instead of happening out in the middle of a wheat field, it could happen in the middle of a big city.”

He said a federal requirement that railroads replace tank cars with a safer generation of tankers by 2025 was “much too long” to wait.

Board member Robert L. Sumwalt, who headed an NTSB delegation sent to the Philadelphia Amtrak crash that killed eight and injured more than 200 in May, said a congressional decision to extend the deadline for installing automatic-breaking technology known as Positive Train Control was “very frustrating.”

“Every day that PTC is not in place, we run the risk of another Amtrak crash,” Sumwalt said, declining to say whether Congress or the railroads deserved most of the blame. “Is it going to take another five years or another three years for it to be implemented? If that’s the case, that’s unacceptable.”

Federal Railroad Administration head Sarah Feinberg has made clear she intends to hold the railroads to strict deadlines to expedite Positive Train Control installation and get the outmoded DOT 111 tank cars replaced.

Ed Greenberg, spokesman for the American Association of Railroads, said Positive Train Control is “a full-time focus of the freight rail industry,” which already has spent $6 billion on installation.

“But the reality is this technology is not off-the shelf. It had to be developed from scratch and isn’t just about plugging in or turning on component; it is a complex step-by-step process, both in terms of safety engineering and implementation,” he said.

Hart was unsympathetic to the complexity of the challenge.

“In 2008, after a PTC-preventable collision in Chatsworth, California, killed 25 people and injured more than 100, Congress passed a law mandating PTC implementation by the end of 2015,” Hart said, listing the number of accidents it could have prevented since 2008. “Now it’s 2016, and according to the 2008 law, such tragedies should be things of the past, but the railroads missed the deadline. Every PTC-preventable accident death and injury on tracks and trains affected by the law will be a direct result of the missed deadline.”

Hart pointed out that Amtrak successfully met the deadline for installation of PTC in the Northeast rail corridor, but most of the big freight rail companies fell far short.

The role of the NTSB is to investigate accidents and make recommendations on safety issues to Congress and federal regulatory agencies.

Besides the completion of rail safety initiatives, the NTSB’s Ten Most Wanted list of recommended safety improvements includes:

• Improve federal rail transit safety oversight.

Hart: “We have seen far too many fatalities and injuries on rail mass transit.”

• Promote collision avoidance technology for cars and trucks.
Hart: “Seat belts are standard equipment rather than a luxury option and the same should be true for collision-avoidance technologies.
• Eliminate operator distractions.
Hart: “Technology has saved countless lives. … But we have recommended prohibiting all cellphone use, including hands-free, because a driver’s mind must be on their driving.”
• Prevent loss of control by small plane pilots that has killed 1,200 people since 2008.
Hart: “The fatal accident rate has been stubbornly resistent to improvement for many years.”
• Curtail drunk and drugged driving.

Hart: “Recently we are seeing prescribed, over the counter and recreational drugs are exacerbating the problem of impaired driving.”

• Require fitness for duty reports for public vehicle operators.
• Expand use of data recorders on planes, trains, ferries and buses.
• Improve protection of passengers riding in vehicles.

AMTRAK
Home
The New York Times (NY) - Amtrak Says New York Region’s Rail Projects Could Cost Up to $23.9 Billion
January 20, 2016
Emma G. Fitzsimmons

Amtrak officials on Wednesday provided the most detailed public account yet for the projected costs of building a new Hudson River rail tunnel and improving other critical parts of the rail infrastructure in the New York region.

The project, known as the Gateway program, has been championed by Anthony Foxx, the federal transportation secretary, who on Wednesday visited the deteriorating rail tunnel that runs between New York and New Jersey.

In a presentation to Mr. Foxx, Amtrak officials said the entire project could cost as much as $23.9 billion, with the largest share of about $7.7 billion going toward building the new Hudson tunnel and repairing the existing tunnel. The project includes a host of other elements, including expanding Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan at an estimated cost of $5.9 billion, and replacing rail bridges in New Jersey.

The project gained momentum last year after Mr. Foxx raised concerns about the existing century-old tunnel, which has two tubes and needs repairs because of damage from Hurricane Sandy. After a contentious debate over how to pay for the tunnel project, federal and state officials agreed to split the costs and to create a corporation within the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to oversee the plans.

After Mr. Foxx toured the tunnel on Wednesday, he said he would continue to advance the plans during the final year of the Obama administration.

“I’d like to have a financing package that is solid enough by the time we walk out of the door that everyone has the certainty that the project will happen, and the funding set aside to get it done,” he said.

Seated at the front of a special train car with panoramic windows, Mr. Foxx examined the tunnel’s crumbling bench walls and the line where floodwaters rose during the storm. A top Amtrak official, Stephen Gardner, stood nearby outlining the scope of the Gateway program and rough estimates for the cost and timeline for the plans.

Amtrak officials have been reluctant to provide specific figures for the cost of the project while they are still in the early stages of planning. On Wednesday, they cautioned that the numbers were preliminary estimates, and the real costs would be determined after conducting engineering work and an environmental plan and considering available financing.

The expansion of Penn Station, by adding tracks to the south, could start in 2024 and be completed by 2030, according to the presentation. Work to replace the Portal Bridge in New Jersey, an old swing bridge that often causes delays, could start next year. There was no timeline provided for the Hudson tunnel project, but Amtrak officials have said that work could take about a decade.

On Wednesday, when Mr. Foxx asked whether the existing tunnel was safe, Amtrak officials said that it was structurally safe, but that service was becoming less reliable. Amtrak’s chairman, Anthony Coscia, and its chief executive, Joseph Boardman, attended the tour, along with Sarah Feinberg, the head of the Federal Railroad Administration.

After a series of bad train delays at the Hudson tunnel last summer, Mr. Foxx helped jump-start long-stalled plans to build a new tunnel under the river. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a Republican who is running for president, canceled an earlier tunnel project in 2010.

This month, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, a Democrat, announced a new effort to renovate Penn Station and to turn the James A. Farley Post Office across the street into a train station and waiting room. But questions remain over how to pay for that project’s $3 billion cost and the governor’s other transportation proposals for the region.

After the tour, Mr. Foxx praised Mr. Cuomo’s big infrastructure plans for the state, but he said officials must remain “laser-focused on fixing what is broken under the Hudson River.”

“That’s where our department’s focus remains,” he said, “until we get that project on an irreversible path toward completion.”

STATE BY STATE
Home
Associated Press (MT) - Chairman open to removing rail safety oversight from PSC
January 20, 2016

HELENA, Mont. (AP) - The chairman of the Montana Public Service Commission said Wednesday he is open to the idea of removing rail safety oversight from his agency, which is one of the recommendations in a recent audit that faulted the PSC for inadequate safety planning.

The PSC’s primary mission is utility regulation, and that’s where most of its resources go, while rail safety is not really in keeping with that mission, said Chairman Brad Johnson during a meeting to address the Legislative Audit Division’s report.

“I think the entire rail safety question resides here not so much by design and intent as it does by default,” Johnson said. He said afterward that the program may be better off with the Montana Department of Transportation.

Transportation department officials did not exactly embrace the prospect. The department’s mission is not regulatory, but infrastructure improvement and maintenance, said spokeswoman Charity Watt.

“The major issue that was uncovered in the audit was inadequate resources. That’s going to be the issue no matter who’s in charge,” she added.

Johnson was speaking for himself and not the entire commission, which plans to examine all options to improve the rail safety program in the coming months, PSC spokesman Eric Sell said. The aim is to have a proposed bill before state lawmakers in time for the 2017 legislative session, Sell said.

The October audit faulted the PSC for not having a rail safety plan, not conducting a risk assessment, not engaging in regional rail safety issues and having no goals other than meeting the minimum number of track inspections each year. The safety issue is a concern given the increased train traffic carrying volatile crude oil from the Bakken region of North Dakota, the audit said.

The two inspectors employed by the PSC are not enough to adequately cover the state, the report said.

The audit recommended adding an inspector. Johnson said the best situation would be to have four inspectors and a supervisor to ensure inspections can happen seven days a week, instead of the current four days, but there is no money in the budget for those hires.

Commissioners invited railroad company representatives and officials from other state agencies to Wednesday’s meeting for their comments on ways to improve rail safety. Commissioner Kirk Bushman suggested the PSC’s role is to “spot-check” the rail companies’ own inspections to make sure they’re doing what they are supposed to.

BNSF Railway spokesman Matt Jones said the company employs 45 full-time inspectors and submits data to the Federal Railroad Administration that can be accessed by the state.

Johnson said all options will be considered as the commission continues to investigate the problem, including what it would take to create a safety plan and asking lawmakers for money to hire more staff.

The PSC will do whatever the Legislature gives it the authority - and the funding - to do, Johnson said.

CTPost (CT) - Metro-North workers get hotline for rail safety tips
January 20, 2016
Jim Shay

See something, say something.

After an agreement was signed Tuesday, Metro-North employees who see unsafe conditions on the railroad — or near-misses by trains — will now have a confidential way to say something about it without fear of retribution.

It’s the nation’s first commuter railroad to have such a confidential system for its workers.

“The information about close call incidents enables the railroad to identify factors that contribute to accidents or injuries and to correct these problems before they result in harm,” said FRA Administrator Sarah Feinberg. “It will increase productivity and cost savings by reducing claims and litigation as well as time lost from injuries. The program will also help to decrease damage to railroad property and the environment.

Once a complaint or tip is made in the Confidential Close Call Reporting System, it will be reviewed by a panel comprised of members from Metro-North, the Federal Railroad Administration and railroad workers’ unions.

The system was given the go-ahead after Metro-North, unions representing 4,000 workers and the FRA signed a memorandum of understanding agreement to establish a hotline for workers to unsafe conditions without fear of retribution.

The agreement for the railroad’s engineering and mechanical workers is similar to an earlier agreement reached last year with about 1,500 transportation department employees.

It comes after a series of railroad accidents involving Metro-North trains, including a 2013 derailment in Bridgeport injured over 70 passengers and a Bronx derailment a few months later killed four passengers and injured 76.

Two other instances of trains jumping tracks in 2015 renewed concerns about Metro-North’s safety and reliability.

While the reporting of close-call events will not be used as a substitute for any existing Metro-North safety programs or reporting procedures, it will serve as an additional tool for improving safety, Metro-North said.

“Every day, nearly 300,000 people count on Metro-North to transport them safely to their jobs in the morning and home to their families every night. Starting a Confidential Close Call Reporting System for its mechanical and engineering Departments is another important step toward improving Metro-North’s safety culture, preventing accidents before they happen and increasing worker safety,” the FRA’s Feinberg said.

The confidential reporting system was part of Metro-North President Joseph Giuletti’s action plan to improve safety on the railroad since he began assumed the job in February 2014.

“This program confirms how much we depend on our employees to detect potential risks to our operations,” said Metro-North President Joseph Giulietti “They are the eyes and ears of Metro-North and we appreciate their contribution to making the system run safely and efficiently.”

Progressive Railroading - Metro-North to implement 'close call' reporting system
January 20, 2016

MTA Metro-North Railroad, various labor unions and the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) yesterday signed a memorandum of understanding describing the core principles and values for implementing an anonymous close call reporting system.

A partnership between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the FRA, the Confidential Close Call Reporting System (C3RS) is designed to encourage workers to report any potential safety hazards or breaches of procedures they see, MTA officials said in a press release.

Through the system, NASA receives the details of an incident through an online form. The agency then removes identifying information before sharing news of the safety preach with a peer review team comprising FRA representatives, Metro-North and labor unions.

"This program confirms how much we depend on our employees to detect potential risks to our operations," said Metro-North President Joseph Giulietti. "They are the eyes and ears of Metro-North and we appreciate their contribution to making the system run safely and efficiently."

Other railroads currently using C3RS include MTA Long Island Rail Road, New Jersey Transit, Amtrak and Strasburg Rail Road. Reporting results from each railroad provide the chance to see industrywide trends in close call incidents and use the information to prevent similar or more serious incidents from occurring, MTA officials said.

In April 2015, Metra's management signed a similar memorandum of understanding committing to implementing the new system.

Metro-North is the first commuter railroad to implement the system with all operations workers throughout its entire network, MTA officials said.

Star Tribune (MN) - After 7 years, Lakeville residents fight rail storage in backyards
January 20, 2016
Emma Nelson

 Lakeville neighbors worry that storage near their homes is a safety hazard 

For seven years, the floor-to-ceiling windows at the back of Pam Steinhagen’s Lakeville house have often been filled with an unlikely view: a long line of parked railroad cars.

In warm weather, some of the cars have filled with stagnant water, attracting swarms of mosquitoes. When they’re moved from one stretch of track to another, they can block the neighborhood’s only exit. And teenagers often test their luck climbing up to sunbathe or running down the line of cars, jumping the gaps as they go.

“Basically, this is a rail yard,” said Theresa Johnson, Steinhagen’s neighbor. “It’s just a matter of time before someone gets hurt or killed.”

Across the country, lessened demand for products like frac sand has taken freight trains out of commission. In 2015, total U.S. carload traffic was down 6 percent from the year before, according to the Association of American Railroads. The group credits that drop, in part, to declines in the energy and manufacturing industries.

With less demand for trains, rail yards fill up and companies turn to unused stretches of track like the one behind Steinhagen’s house for long-term storage. The practice has raised concerns among locals about everything from aesthetics to environmental impact.

The track in Lakeville, which at one time was targeted for a potential county greenway, is owned by Canadian Pacific but operated by a Lakeville company called Progressive Rail. Dave Fellon, the company’s president, declined to comment. In 2012, he told the Star Tribune that a sluggish economy was keeping the cars parked.

Railroads fall under federal authority, but there are no safeguards to keep unused cars from languishing in one spot. Minnesota’s U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar and U.S. Rep. John Kline introduced bills this session that would require rail carriers to have a storage plan approved by the Surface Transportation Board, but neither measure has moved out of committee.

“Federal law just pre-empts this entire field of law, leaving individual citizens and communities completely helpless to railroads that are largely unresponsive to local concerns,” said Anders Blewett, an attorney and former Montana legislator who fought against rail car storage along the Missouri River.

Blewett introduced a joint resolution in 2009 publicly censuring the BNSF Railway for storing cars indefinitely along the river. Though the resolution didn’t pass, public opposition finally got the approximately 1,000 cars moved in 2010 — about three years after they arrived.

A similar outcry arose in New York state, when Iowa Pacific Holdings made plans to store oil tankers on tracks running through protected land in the Adirondack Mountains. Faced with continued opposition from environmental preservation advocates, the company backed down this fall.

In Lakeville, long-term rail car storage has been on the city’s legislative agenda for years. But there’s not much the city can do beyond supporting measures at the federal level.

“Ideally, we’d like to see them not there at all,” said City Administrator Justin Miller. “But even if there was a time limit, I think that would be a good first step.”

For now, those closest to the tracks are still worried. They’re anticipating diminished property values or not being able to sell their houses at all. They’ve noticed oily residue dripping from the cars to the ground, and have wondered whether it’s safe.

Steinhagen, who runs a day care out of her home, said she and her neighbors feel responsible for “policing” the cars for trespassers and graffiti.

“We didn’t purchase our properties knowing there would be rail storage in our own backyard,” said resident Jeff Vanden Busch. “We’ve taken it for seven years, and it’s time something happened.”

Delaware Online (DE) - Feds considering new train tracks, stations in Delaware
January 20, 2016
Karl Baker

More train tracks and new stations in Delaware are options being considered as part of an upgrade to the Northeast rail corridor by the Federal Railroad Administration, which held a public meeting Wednesday in Wilmington.

"We have such aging infrastructure, and we have to be responsive as the region continues to grow," said Rebecca Reyes-Alicea, who oversees the agency's Northeast corridor operations, which extends from Washington, D.C., to Boston.

The tracks along the corridor, including in Delaware, are operating at capacity. Reyes-Alicea said that in order to keep up with future growth in the Northeast, states and the federal government need to replace the sometimes Civil War-era rail infrastructure, as well as build entirely new routes.

The meeting Wednesday at the Delaware Technical Community College campus in downtown Wilmington offered a chance to get information about three options being considered by the agency, part of the U.S. Department of Transportation. Each presents a different approach to handling demand on the corridor, which is used by eight regional rail agencies and 250 million passengers a year.

The first option is to maintain the current role of rail for future growth, which would cost $65 billion. For Delaware, projects would include the reconfiguration of tracks around the Newark train station, where renovations are planned. New stations in Newport and Edgemore, and a plan to add an additional track between Newark and Bayview, Maryland, also sit within this category.

The second option would be to expand rail's importance as the region grows, which has a cost of $135 billion. For this alternative, the FRA proposes two new rail bypasses connecting in Delaware – one between Newark and Perryville, Maryland, and another around Wilmington. It also includes a new rail connection to the Philadelphia International Airport from the south.

The most ambitious and expansive option would cost $290 billion, and would be highlighted by a second railway spine extending down the entire Northeast Corridor, parallel to the existing one, passing through Delaware.

There is also a standby option, according to the FRA, which would not expand infrastructure at all. That alternative is only being used as a baseline, on which to judge the others, Reyes-Alicea said.

Amtrak unveils new locomotive for veterans

The FRA will announce which of three options it chooses before the summer. It will then draw up a blueprint for the preferred alternative by spring 2017.

Factors being considered include the age of the current rails, future population growth, and gaps in connectivity.

The stretch of rail between Newark and Perryville, Maryland, is the only section of the Northeast Corridor that does not have commuter rail service.

Locally, SEPTA's Wilmington, Newark line uses the corridor. Amtrak's only profitable route also uses the tracks, as well as four freight railroads. Wilmington Station also is Amtrak's 11th busiest in the country, as measured by the number of boardings and exits, according to the publicly-owned rail company.

The FRA previously considered a plan to add passenger tracks south of Wilmington to Kent County, and then west across Chesapeake Bay to Annapolis, Maryland. The idea was dismissed because of its expected impact on Chesapeake Bay, said Reyes-Alicea.

"The environmental concerns with that segment were pretty significant," said Reyes-Alicea.

?Most members of the public who spoke at the meeting in Wilmington supported dramatically increasing spending on rail infrastructure.

Scott Maits, a rail advocate from Philadelphia, said track improvements can pay for themselves if they result in faster trains, because more people will want to ride. During his comments to FRA officials, he called for an expanded train station in Wilmington.

"We must do this to revive the economy because there's so much growth coming," Maits said. "If we don't, we'll have to build more highways and more airports."

Mathew Meyer, a representative from the group Bike Delaware, called for a non-infrastructure change to rail service, and said Amtrak should allow cyclists to walk their bikes on and off trains in the corridor, like SEPTA does.

"There's no way for me to go to Washington, D.C., with roll-on (bicycle) service," he said. "In 2016, that's unnaceptable."

Pierce City Herald (WI) - Highway 10 underpass option approved
January 20, 2016
Sarah Young

 PRESCOTT CITY COUNCIL -- An underpass option to carry pedestrian and bicycle traffic beneath Highway 10 at Canton Street and Eagle Ridge Drive was approved unanimously by the Prescott City Council Jan. 11.

City Engineer Russ Kivienmi said the structures would be large box culverts with storm outlets at both ends for water drainage.

The city plans to write a Transportation Alternative Program (TAP) grant with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation to fund the project, which carries an estimated price tag of $1,284,190.

The grant would include 80 percent federal funding; the city would need to come up with the remaining 20 percent. The grant application is due at the end of January. If the grant is awarded (later in 2016), planning and design would begin in 2017 for the 2018 project.

The city’s 20 percent would be a TIF eligible expense, according to the meeting minutes.

Kivienmi said the proposed sidewalks would be included in the grant, as would doing both underpasses at the same time.

Railroad crossing quiet zone

Alderperson Jack Hoschette updated the Council on the possibility of creating a quiet zone for the railroad crossing in town. A quiet zone would mean the trains would no longer blow their whistles, city administrator Jayne Brand said.

“The city has been looking at creating a quiet zone for a number of years,” Brand said. “The city has to work with BNSF and the Federal Railroad Administration to become qualified for a quiet zone. When we looked at it about five years ago the risk factor for our crossing was high because there had been a vehicle accident.  At that time we would have to have spent about $750,000 to add additional railroad arms.”   

With a quiet zone the city will have annual maintenance costs and will take on additional liability because of the quiet zone, Brand said.

Five years ago, the city didn’t want to spend $750,000 to create a quiet zone. Hoschette has been working with the Federal Railroad Administration to see if Prescott’s risk factor has come down because the car accident is over five years old.   

Hoschette will work with Public Works director Hank Zwart to determine the best way to get traffic counts for the crossing, the best time to perform them and the cost.

“He is also working on seeing what type of equipment might be needed to lower the risk factor,” Brand said. “Part of determining the risk factor is to figure out how much traffic crosses the railroad tracks on an average daily basis.”

One option may be to have the quiet zone in force at just nighttime, Hoschette told the Council.
Other business

    A meter reading contract with SL-Serco for 2016 passed unanimously.

    The Municipal Court 2015 budget being over by $8,000 due to 2015 revenues also being over budget passed by a majority vote, with council members Bill Dravis and Robert Daugherty voting no.

    Upon third reading a cross connection water ordinance was passed unanimously.

    Jeff Ryan was appointed a special registration deputy for the 2016-2017 election cycle.

    A request to close Elm Street from Orange to Kinnickinnic streets 3-9 p.m. Friday, June 3 for Kick Off to Summer was approved, as well as an amplifier permit for 5-8 p.m. the day of the event.

    The transfer of a Class B beer license and Class B liquor license to Melons Joints, Inc. (No Name Saloon/Monkey Bar) from Smouth Enterprises, contingent on release of the license, was approved unanimously.

    Operator’s licenses were approved for Lucas Huebner, Lauren Mitchell, Justin Theese and Terrence Schommer.

Miami News Times (FL) - Florida Train Deaths Likely To Rise As All Aboard Florida, Tri-Rail Expand
January 20, 2016
Trevor Bach

Around 2 p.m. December 8, Jesús María Villalobos, a 16-year-old with a big frame and a bigger smile, pulled on his headphones and left his room in Delray Beach for a nearby gym. He walked north along the train tracks until he was near the intersection of Linton Boulevard and South Dixie Highway. Then a Florida East Coast Railway freight train came barreling from behind.

The engineer frantically blew the train's whistle. But Villalobos, who had come to South Florida from Colombia two years earlier to pursue his dream of becoming a pro baseball player, never heard it. The headphones blocked the sound. He was killed instantly.

"He was everything to me," his mother, Diana Lobos, later told the Colombian newspaper El Universal. "I want to die."

In Florida, train-pedestrian casualties have increased steadily the past four years and are likely to climb further. With both All Aboard Florida and Tri-Rail planning to run trains through downtown areas next year, more lives will likely be at risk.

"It's actually a major safety issue," says Dr. Allan Zarembski, a railroad engineering and safety professor at the University of Delaware. "What people still don't understand is that if a train engineer sees you, it's too late for him to stop, period."

The railroad enabled the settlement of Florida. Henry Flagler, a business partner of John D. Rockefeller's in Standard Oil, visited St. Augustine in 1883 and determined it was the next great vacation mecca. He built hotels and then bought the few existing railroads to form the Florida East Coast Railway, which by 1912 had tracks all the way to Key West.
"The only line of defense is to blow his horn, and even that warning is useless if it's not heard."

That rail link facilitated the population boom along the state's east coast, but it also meant a significant safety risk. In the mid-'70s, the oldest data available from the Federal Railroad Safety Association, 18 to 31 "trespassers" were killed by trains per year. (The term refers to nonemployee pedestrians on the tracks.)

That number remained steady despite increased awareness about the danger of rail crossings and congressional funding for rail safety improvements. But it has begun growing again in the past four years. There were 27 trespasser deaths in Florida in 2012, 28 in 2013, 36 in 2014, and 35 through just the first nine months of 2015 — higher figures than even those for New York.

Some recent examples:

• September 29, Michael Nesmith, a 55-year-old blind man, was struck from behind and killed by a Tri-Rail train while he walked along the tracks in Dania Beach.

• October 27, Thomas Kelly, age 51, was struck and killed in Melbourne while walking on a train bridge with a friend, who survived by jumping into the water below.

• November 6, 29-year-old David Lefever was fatally hit by an Amtrak train in downtown Orlando.

• November 12, a woman was struck and killed in Altamonte Springs.

Yet more trains are soon coming to Florida, which likely means even more deaths. In mid-2017, All Aboard Florida's much-heralded Brightline route linking Miami and Orlando will begin service. The new line will eventually expand to include ten trains that will travel at a top speed of 125 mph. The entire project, which also includes the refurbishing or building of four multimillion-dollar stations, will generate $6 billion in economic activity, the company promises.

There's more. Tri-Rail, the commuter service that serves Palm Beach and Broward counties and connects to Miami International Airport, also has plans to expand into downtown Miami in 2017 at an estimated cost of $70 million. The Tri-Rail trains will begin using the tracks in Miami east of I-95 — running 50 trains per weekday through the city's main population corridor. "It's going to happen," Jack Stephens, executive director of the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority, told the Miami Herald last fall.

The most surefire way to keep people off the tracks is to erect fences. But doing so is costly and unrealistic for long distances, and potentially controversial: When Brightline began fencing the area around its new station in Fort Lauderdale, some advocates complained that the effort was effectively displacing the homeless, New Times reported.

Public relations campaigns can help reinforce the danger posed by walking along tracks, but ultimately there's only so much more the railroads can do: Trains simply take too long to stop to avoid a collision with a pedestrian who's walking on the tracks. "The only line of defense the engineer has is to blow his horn," Zarembski says. "And even that warning, of course, is useless if it's not heard."

Of all the recent train trespasser deaths, it's Jesús Villalobos' that best illustrates the particular danger facing South Florida, where a large segment of the population may simply not be aware of the peril.

Villalobos grew up in Cartagena, a baseball-crazy city on the Colombian coast, and fell in love with the game before he was out of elementary school. When he was 9, his team, Club Falcón, won a local junior title, and Villalobos, as catcher, was the most valuable player. "When I arrived at the Falcon school, nobody wanted to catch," he said after winning the title. "I stopped and said, 'I want to.' "

He told a reporter his dream was to make the big leagues, and five years later was on his way to Florida, to train at the Elev8 Sports Institute in Delray Beach, an academy with a host of international athletes. Initially he struggled. He was short and chubby, and also lacked the skills of most of his peers.

Soon after Villalobos' arrival, the program's head baseball coach, Todd Moser, remembers, he sent the youngster to the bullpen to catch for an older pitcher who was warming up. It was a disaster. Villalobos hadn't even put on his equipment properly. A curve ball caught him in an unprotected shin. The boy began jumping around in pain, cursing in Spanish. "It was that bad," Moser says. "Another guy had to finish warming [the pitcher] up."

But Villalobos soon emerged as the academy's most enthusiastic — and most improved — player. He stayed late, asked coaches for advice, and worked out as hard as anyone. He also advanced in the classroom, greatly improving his English, and benefited from a growth spurt, transforming in two years into a muscular, six-foot-two, 220-pound teen. In recent months, he had even attracted the attention of coaches from big-time programs, including Clemson, North Carolina State, and Florida Atlantic University.

"He was the hardest-working guy we have," Moser says. "This is the kind of guy — you wish you had 25 of them. It was surreal how much he changed into a player."

But just a few weeks ago, all of those dreams were shattered by a locomotive. In Cartagena, the tight-knit baseball community mourned the unexpected loss of a son who was on his way to the big time. In Delray, too, Villalobos' new family was left reeling. "We're just trying to make it through," says Moser, who adds that he isn't sure if better rail precautions might have saved the teenager's life.

"It's sadly a question where we're never going to get an answer."

3


