 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 19, 2016
TV & RADIO
Railroad crossing malfunction causing major backups in Charlotte this morning	2
NTSB warns major rail accidents inevitable	2
Cold has slowing impact on MBTA	2
Amtrak Surfrider train hits car in San Diego	3
Winona student struck and killed by train	3
Trespasser killed on Haverhill Line in Mass	3
Amtrak back on track after derailment in Quincy	3
CSX investigating derailment near Schenectady NY	3
BNSF train strikes truck, no injuries reported	3
Police investigating fatal trespass incident in Iberia Parrish, LA	3
North Carolina rates 7th nationally for railroad trespass fatalities	3
Family's 38' camper trailer destroyed when struck by freight train	3
NATIONAL NEWS
The Wall Street Journal- Regulator to Scrutinize ‘Significant Safety Hurdles’ From Major Railroad Mergers	3
Progressive Railroading- FRA: rail mergers would impact safety; SMART TD opposed to CP takeover of NS	5
The Columbus Dispatch- Safety is railroad agency’s top concern	6
The American Bazaar- India’s railway minister Suresh Prabhu meets Victor Mendez in Washington	7
PTC
Huffington Post - The Technology To Prevent Deadly Train Crashes Exists. Why Is It Taking So Long To Install?	8
RAIL INCIDENTS
San Diego Union Tribune - Amtrak train slams into SUV	10
Associated Press - Reports: Amtrak train's collision with big rig leaves truck driver dead	11
ABC 7 (IL) – Amtrak Train Hits Truck in Lisle; 2 Injured	11
Associated Press - Minor freight train derailment reported near Schenectady	12
Chicago Tribune - 2 Metra BNSF trains canceled following crash involving Amtrak train	12
Chicago Sun Times - Metra BNSF trains delayed after Amtrak accident near Lisle	13
CROSSING NEWS
The Daily Republic - Rail crossing safety questioned	14
WAMC (NY) - ‘Schumer Urges CSX To Address Safety Concerns At A Cornwall Crossing	15
HIGH SPEED RAIL
Progressive Railroading - California High-Speed Rail Authority inks station funding pact with Burbank	17
HHFT
Desmog Blog - There Will Be Blood - Oil Train Regulations Fail To Address Known Risks	18
AMTRAK
WNPR - Plans for New York's Penn Station Include a Link to Metro-North	22
Newsworks- Coalition calls for new Amtrak station in Buffalo	24
Newsworks- Passenger train service on America's Northeast Corridor could get a lot faster	24
Associated Press - Amtrak to add business-class seating to Cardinal route	26
The News Tribune - Amtrak station construction to begin this spring	27
STATE BY STATE
Argus Leader - Letter: Safety is freight rail industry priority	28
Sun Herald (MS) - Study inches New Orleans-to-Mobile passenger train closer to reality	29


TV & RADIO
Home
Railroad crossing malfunction causing major backups in Charlotte this morning
WSOC-CLT (ABC) - Charlotte, NC

NTSB warns major rail accidents inevitable
KGW-POR (NBC) - Portland, OR

Cold has slowing impact on MBTA
WFXT-BOS (FOX) - Boston, MA

Amtrak Surfrider train hits car in San Diego
KGTV-SD (ABC) - San Diego, CA

Winona student struck and killed by train
WKBT (CBS) - La Crosse, WI

Trespasser killed on Haverhill Line in Mass
WJAR-PVD (NBC) - Providence, RI

Amtrak back on track after derailment in Quincy
WGEM (NBC) - Quincy, IL

CSX investigating derailment near Schenectady NY
WNYT (NBC) - Albany, NY

BNSF train strikes truck, no injuries reported
KASA-ABQ (FOX) - Albuquerque, NM

Police investigating fatal trespass incident in Iberia Parrish, LA
KATC (ABC) - Lafayette, LA

North Carolina rates 7th nationally for railroad trespass fatalities
News 14 Triangle - Raleigh, NC

Family's 38' camper trailer destroyed when struck by freight train
WDAM (NBC) - Hattieburg, MS

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
The Wall Street Journal- Regulator to Scrutinize ‘Significant Safety Hurdles’ From Major Railroad Mergers
January 15, 2016
Ted Mann and Laura Stevens

Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. faces an additional obstacle in its effort to combine with Norfolk Southern Corp., as federal regulators are concerned that mergers of major freight railroads can undermine safety.

The Federal Railroad Administration, which regulates safety for the U.S. industry, expects to scrutinize the “significant safety hurdles” that would result from merging any of the nation’s major railroads, the head of the agency said.

“Combining large rail systems, rule books, workforces, and safety cultures can lead to safety vulnerabilities and deficiencies,” Federal Railroad Administrator Sarah Feinberg said. “It’s our job to insure that safety is not only not compromised in any potential merger, but prioritized.”

Challenges include combining safety cultures of two different organizations, including determining which company’s safety rules and protocols will take precedence and how to restructure a combined workforce to maintain the same level of communication and protection each had individually.

The FRA isn’t empowered to block railroad mergers, which require approval by another federal body, the Surface Transportation Board. It is, however, granted power by that body to work with railroads on a “safety integration plan” to ensure safe operations in the case of a merger under largely untested rules put in place in 2001.

It is the latest wrinkle in CP’s roughly $30 billion merger proposal, made public in November, which has been rebuffed by Norfolk Southern as “grossly inadequate.” CP has said its next steps may include launching a proxy fight to take the offer directly to shareholders.

“Operating safely is the foundation of our operating model here at CP. It’s a multipronged approach that shapes all our decisions at every level and has driven improvements at CP and will drive significant and lasting safety improvements at NS,” Canadian Pacific Chief Operating Officer Keith Creel said in an emailed statement.

The way in which the railroads would combine would result in more end-to-end service for customers without handoffs and interchanges, which would further improve safety, he added.

Norfolk Southern declined to comment.

Shippers already have been weighing in on the proceedings, filing letters with the Surface Transportation Board to oppose a combination of CP and Norfolk Southern. Manufacturers’ associations in Indiana, Kentucky, West Virginia and Pennsylvania, as well as those in the agricultural and automotive industries, have written to express concern about potential price increases and service problems if a merger occurs.

Other railroads also oppose the merger, including CSX Corp., Union Pacific Corp. and BNSF Railway Co. BNSF has said that if the CP-NS combination were to go forward, it would likely lead to further consolidation and big rail mergers as other railroads try to stay competitive, something in which BNSF would participate.

CP has argued that the combination of the two railroads would result in better service, more competition and congestion relief in the Chicago area. In addition, its executives believe they can run Norfolk Southern more efficiently, cutting costs and improving profitability.

The potential input from the FRA in a merger proceeding is another facet of regulatory scrutiny that weighs against efforts to combine any of North America’s seven major freight railroads. Safety concerns have grown at a time of busy traffic on the rails, especially after a series of fiery derailments of trains carrying crude oil.

Nonetheless, the past several years have shown improvements in rail safety, including at CP. The company’s train accidents per million train miles traveled fell from roughly 3 per million miles traveled to 1.3 per million miles traveled from 2013 to 2015, according to FRA data.

Meanwhile, a member of the Surface Transportation Board, Deb Miller, said in an interview that the agency’s mandate includes ensuring any merger is in the public interest and that it promotes competition. “Without question, safety is very likely to come up, but it’s going to come up under that broader question of public interest,” she said.

Federal safety officials have zeroed in on mergers before when searching for the cause of safety lapses at major freights. The National Transportation Safety Board held a special hearing in 1998 into Union Pacific, after a series of accidents that killed workers and some members of the public following its merger with Southern Pacific the year before. The agency criticized Union Pacific management at the time for insufficient procedures governing employee workload and train dispatching.

The FRA blamed the incidents in part on a “corporate culture in the merged Union Pacific and Southern Pacific railroad companies [that] had varying attitudes toward safety and a primary focus on improving operational efficiency instead of safety.”

But the issue has had little cause for study in the years since. There hasn’t been a merger of Class 1 freight railroads, the classification of the largest freights, since the current merger rules took effect in 2001.

“Certainly mergers of this size are hard to accomplish, and so they can lead to lost shipments, congested yards, all kinds of occurrences that create stress in the system,” said Grady Cothen, a former FRA safety official who is now an industry consultant. “And so that can over a short term I think create some enhanced risk.”

Progressive Railroading- FRA: rail mergers would impact safety; SMART TD opposed to CP takeover of NS
January 15, 2016

Federal Railroad Administrator Sarah Feinberg late last week told the Wall Street Journal that her agency has concerns that mergers of Class Is could undermine railroad safety.

Although the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) has no regulatory authority to stop a merger, Feinberg said the FRA would expect to scrutinize the "significant safety hurdles" that would result from mergers between two major freight railroads, the newspaper reported.

"Combining large rail systems, rule books, workforces and safety cultures can lead to safety vulnerabilities and deficiencies," Feinberg said. "It's our job to insure that safety is not only not compromised in any potential merger, but prioritized."

Meanwhile, the president of the Transportation Division of the International Association of Sheet Metal, Air, Rail and Transportation Workers (SMART TD) is among the latest in a series of letter writers to voice objections to the Surface Transportation Board (STB) regarding Canadian Pacific's proposed takeover of Norfolk Southern Corp.

In his Jan. 14 letter to the board, John Previsich said the union is "strongly opposed" to the proposal, and its "real potential for a far-reaching, detrimental impact on America's rail network, including lost jobs and an equally negative impact on those who ship by rail."

He also opposes CP's plan to establish a voting trust to assume control in advance of STB approval of the merger. Such a move would violate existing statutes and regulations regarding "unlawful control," he wrote.

Additionally, Previsich expressed concern that the merger would result in cost-cutting measures that would enrich officers and stockholders at the expense of railroad workers, infrastructure maintenance and necessary capital projects.

"CP's relentless pursuit of short-term profit with little regard to the impact on the greater good — workers, communities and our nation's rail shippers is well known," Previsich wrote. "If approved, this merger would mean fewer railroads and less competition in the industry. The certain results will be fewer rail jobs, higher freight rates and diminished rail service."

SMART TD represents more than 125,000 active and retired railroad workers.

The Columbus Dispatch- Safety is railroad agency’s top concern
January 17, 2016

Each day, nearly 900 professionals at the Federal Railroad Administration work to keep America’s communities and rail passengers safe. In particular, they work tirelessly to prevent crude-oil train derailments chronicled in The Dispatch’s recent “ Wrong Track” series (Dec. 20-22).

We take a comprehensive approach to safety because multiple factors can contribute to a derailment, spill and other dangerous incidents. That comprehensive approach includes more than three dozen actions during the past two years alone to make transporting crude oil safer.

Just one of those actions, as the series highlighted, is last year’s final rule requiring stronger tank cars less likely to puncture and a new braking system that reduces stopping distances and decreases the number of tank cars likely to derail in an incident. FRA has also started the process to establish rail-wear standards to avoid incidents caused by broken rail, and is pushing railroads to do more to ensure that employees who inspect rail are properly trained.

Transparency and accountability have been cornerstones in our safety approach. FRA requires railroads to inform states of the expected movement of crude-oil trains so local emergency responders can properly prepare. And the agency has provided more information to the media and public than ever before when significant derailments do occur.

Although nearly half of FRA’s inspectors retired in the past 10 years, FRA aggressively recruited new talent, and now has more inspectors than ever before. Our inspectors conduct blitzes in regions such as the Columbus area that see heavy crude traffic.

Safety is FRA’s mission and No. 1 priority. We will continue to do all we can to keep communities like Columbus safe. We welcome The Dis patch’s reporting on this important issue, and we hope to continue the conversation and engagement with the Columbus community.

SARAH E. FEINBERG

The American Bazaar- India’s railway minister Suresh Prabhu meets Victor Mendez in Washington
January 15, 2016

India’s railway minister Suresh Prabhu is on a 3-day visit to the United States, primarily at the invitation of the World Bank.

Prabhu will address the World Bank’s plenary session on ‘Transport and Cities – Key Drivers for Meeting Climate Goals’.

Prabhu will also try to get investments for the railways, give a fillip to the government’s ‘Make in India’ campaign, with the budget a month away.

Reports said Prabhu will also attend seminars to hard sell Indian Railways as a viable investment option. He spoke on ‘Railway Reforms in India’ at the World Bank headquarters, outlining the measures he has taken to put the organization back on track, according to a press release.

Prabhu met the US Deputy Secretary of Transportation Victor Mendez on Friday to discuss possible cooperation in the railway sector, although details were yet to come in.

Prabhu is also scheduled to address a meeting of the US-India Business Council (USIBC) followed by a roundtable discussion on ‘India’s Drive for Development’ at the American Enterprise Institute.

A railway spokesperson said Prabhu will also participate in an event on ‘India’s Development: Government’s Approach to Infrastructure Development’, organized by the India Club of World Bank’s 1818 Society, according to The Economic Times.

Prabhu has already held meetings with chairman and president of US EXIM Bank Fred P Hochberg and officials of International Finance Corporation.

PTC
Home
Huffington Post - The Technology To Prevent Deadly Train Crashes Exists. Why Is It Taking So Long To Install?
January 15, 2016
Laura Barron – Lopez

WASHINGTON -- In 2008, a Metrolink train slammed head-on into a Union Pacific freight train in southern California, killing 25 people and injuring 135. The Metrolink train's engineer, distracted by a text, had failed to stop at a red light. In 2013, a Metro-North commuter train operated by a sleep-deprived engineer rounded a curve in southern New York at 82 mph when it was supposed to be going 30 mph. It derailed, killing four and injuring dozens. And in May, an Amtrak derailment near Philadelphia killed eight people and injured scores more.

Technology called positive train control (PTC), which uses digital radio communications, global positioning satellites and fixed trackside signal systems to track trains' speed and location in real time, could have prevented all three tragedies. It also could have prevented 25 other train accidents that killed more than 34 people and injured about 600 between 2001 and 2008, according to the Federal Railroad Administration.

PTC can stop train-to-train collisions, prevent trains from going too fast and keep a train from moving in the wrong direction. The National Transportation Safety Board, which investigates transportation disasters, has been recommending railroads install PTC since 1969. The technology is the "one thing we keep coming back to" after each fatal accident, said NTSB spokesman Peter Knudson.

After the 2008 collision in California, lawmakers in the nation’s capital set the first-ever federal mandate for freight and commuter railroads, requiring them to install the technology by the end of 2015.

Amtrak installed PTC technology along its Northeast Corridor track and a number of other lines by the deadline, but didn't finish the job. Metrolink in California has installed PTC on roughly 80 percent of its tracks. Most other commuter railroads are even further behind, and haven't installed PTC at all.

In October, Congress effectively gave railroad companies until 2020 to get PTC installed and activated on their tracks and locomotives.

"[That] would be 50 years after NTSB first recommended that railroads install PTC," said Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.), who says he uses Amtrak at least once a week. "But a five-year extension seems way too long, with way too little assurance that it in fact will even be installed by then."

The railroads have provided a variety of reasons as to why they needed more time to get PTC up and running, Blumenthal said, but he considers them "pretty thin excuses."

Regulators agree.

"The focus must remain on getting PTC up and running as soon as possible," FRA Administrator Sarah Feinberg told railroads at an industry safety meeting in November. "The Amtrak accident in Philadelphia remains a stark reminder of both what can happen without PTC, and the sense of urgency required to prevent a similar accident in the future. Do not make it your goal, please, to be the last one to cross the finish line. ... The public deserves it."

But railroads say Congress demanded too much while offering little help to install complex technology that only a handful of engineers know how to set up.

When Congress first set the end of 2015 as the deadline for railroads to install PTC, companies took it as an "artificial date," said Mike Noland, CEO of Northern Indiana Commuter Transportation District.

Noland, who manages the 90 miles of South Shore Line railroad between South Bend, Indiana, and Chicago, said the industry told Congress at the time that it couldn't reach lawmakers' goal until 2018.

"There were no companies doing it," Noland said. "This was brand-new technology."

Part of the holdup is that railroads are having trouble getting authorization from the Federal Communication Commission to access the radio frequencies they need for PTC’s communications. There aren't many engineering firms capable of supplying PTC, which is also causing a backlog, and railroads have sent the FRA only three of the 38 PTC implementation safety plans regulators need to certify installations.

"These are complex issues that sometimes folks in Washington just don’t want to get in the weeds on," Noland said. "But they are the realities for those of us who live this and working on this in the industry."

On top of that, the technology is expensive. When implementation is all said and done, it will cost Noland’s railroad roughly $90 million, he says -- five times his annual capital spending. The total cost of implementing PTC nationally for the commuter rail industry will be $3.5 billion, according to a conservative estimate from the American Public Transportation Association.

The FRA has approved millions of dollars in grants to help railroads install PTC, but that doesn't go to every commuter or freight railroad.

"We didn’t get a single dollar, not one dollar -- not one dollar has come from the federal government from this mandate," Noland said. "So we’re having trouble maintaining infrastructure as it is and then they layer on this mandate."

Commuter rail isn’t alone.The law requires freight rail carrying materials that are poisonous or toxic when inhaled to install PTC as well, and it hasn’t been easy.

Ed Greenberg, spokesman for the American Association of Railroads, said freight railroads are currently experiencing failure rates on their PTC tests of up to 40 percent.

"Positive train control is unprecedented technology that had to be developed from scratch," Greenberg said. "PTC isn’t just about plugging in or turning on components. It is a complex process, both in terms of safety engineering and implementation. It is not off-the-shelf technology."

By the end of 2015, PTC had been installed on only 14 percent of the more than 60,000 miles on which freight operates. Final implementation of the technology, Greenberg said, will cost freight railroads somewhere between $9 billion and $10 billion.

Congress passed a sweeping surface transportation bill in December, the first in nearly a decade. In it, lawmakers directed $8 billion in funding to Amtrak, $3 billion of which is intended specifically for the Northeast Corridor. The bill also included $199 million for PTC installation. 

That lack of funding for PTC will only continue to make implementation of the needed technology slow going. It’s something that has frustrated Democrats like Del. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-D.C.), who pointed to the issue as characteristic of larger problems within the country’s transportation sector.

"To talk about increases in this country is already to talk language that has almost disappeared," she said. "As long as Congress doesn’t think that you can spend money on infrastructure anymore, I guess we’ll be stuck on stupid."

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
San Diego Union Tribune - Amtrak train slams into SUV
January 18, 2016
Lyndsay Winkley

An Amtrak train slammed into an SUV in Little Italy on Monday, and firefighters spent about 15 minutes cutting through the wreckage to free the driver, officials said.

Witnesses told fire officials that the black Ford Escape was headed west on Hawthorn Street when it went across the train tracks near Kettner Boulevard as the crossing arms came down. The SUV was trapped, and a northbound train struck it on the driver’s side about 1:40 p.m., said San Diego Fire-Rescue Department spokesman Lee Swanson.

The SUV was pushed about 200 feet along the track before it and the train came to a stop. Firefighters arrived soon after, and began cutting the vehicle’s roof away. It took them about 15 minutes to get to the driver, who was the only one inside, and pull him free, Swanson said.

The man was conscious and didn’t appear to have any obvious major injuries, Swanson said. He was taken to a hospital to be evaluated more closely.

Associated Press - Reports: Amtrak train's collision with big rig leaves truck driver dead
January 15, 2016
Carol Christian

An Amtrak train headed from San Antonio to Chicago collided with an 18-wheeler blocking the tracks near Mesquite, killing the truck driver.

The accident happened at 4:30 p.m. Thursday, delaying Train 22, the Texas Eagle, at the scene for 5 1/2 hours, an Amtrak spokesman said.
None of the train's 44 passengers or six crew members was hurt, he said. One passenger was checked by emergency medical responders at the scene but remained on the train, he said.

According to NBC DFW, the Dallas County Medical Examiner's Office identified the truck driver as Shannon Thomas of Plano.

A spokeswoman for the Dallas County Sheriff's Office told the station that it was unclear what had caused the accident, which remained under investigation.

The truck was hauling rocks and was headed to a paving contractor next to the tracks along East Scyene Road in Sunnyvale, the station reported.

According to KLTV, the train's locomotive had to be replaced.

ABC 7 (IL) – Amtrak Train Hits Truck in Lisle; 2 Injured
January 15, 2016

Two people were injured Saturday evening when an Amtrak train struck a truck in suburban Lisle, train officials said.

The two injured BNSF workers were transported to a hospital in Downers Grove. Their conditions have not been released. No one on board the train - which was carrying 114 passengers and three crew members - was injured.

At about 6:30 p.m., the train hit a BNSF welding truck, just east of Naperville, according to Amtrak. Officials say the train's final destination was Quincy and that alternative transportation was provided for passengers.

Metra service has been restored after crews worked to clear the area.

Associated Press - Minor freight train derailment reported near Schenectady
January 15, 2016

PATTERSONVILLE, N.Y. (AP) — Authorities are reporting a minor freight train derailment near Schenectady, New York.

A spokesman for CSX Railroad tells the Albany Times-Union (http://bit.ly/1SokT4M) that three cars of a 207-car freighter derailed around 4 a.m. Saturday in Pattersonville. No injuries were reported.

Two of the cars were empty and one contained salt. CSX spokesman Rob Doolittle added no hazardous materials were involved.

He says a contractor for CSX is trying to get the cars back on the rails. The cause of the derailment is under investigation.

The train was on its way from Selkirk, New York to Willard, Ohio.

Doolittle says 95 of the cars were empty and 112 were loaded.

Construction debris, cardboard, railroad ties and plastic pellets were among the freight that was being hauled.

Chicago Tribune - 2 Metra BNSF trains canceled following crash involving Amtrak train
January 16, 2016

Two Metra BNSF trains were canceled Saturday night following a crash involving an Amtrak train.

Two inbound BNSF trains are stopped near west suburban Lisle after an Amtrak train struck a welding truck, a Metra spokesperson said.

Amtrak train 383 to Quincy was heading west from Chicago when it hit the truck about 6:30 p.m., said Amtrak spokeswoman Chelsea Kopta. None of the 114 passengers and three crew members were injured and the railroad was arranging alternate transportation for those on the train, she said.

The accident happened at least by 6:40 p.m., and likely earlier than that, said Meg Reile, a Metra spokewoman. Metal gets brittle when it’s cold so track welders were doing some work in the Lisle area, she said.

Outbound trains are only going as far as Belmont at Downer’s Grove. Metra train No. 1324, which departed Aurora around 11:40 p.m., is picking up customers going inbound and taking them into the city because they’d like people to get out of the cold and the delay is not expected to be short, according to Reile and Metra’s website.

"BNSF Railway inbound and outbound trains remain stopped near Lisle due to an accident involving an Amtrak train, extensive delays are expected. The duration of this delay is unknown," Metra said in an alert a little before 7 p.m.

Check Metra's site for updated travel information.

The Amtrak train was the last Amtrak run for the night, so no further Amtrak trains were expected to be delayed, Kopta said.

Chicago Sun Times - Metra BNSF trains delayed after Amtrak accident near Lisle
January 16, 2016
Alexandra Kukulka

Metra BNSF trains were stopped near Lisle Saturday night after an accident involving an Amtrak train, and big delays were expected as a result.

At 6:35 p.m., Amtrak train 383 headed for Quincy hit a BNSF welding truck, according to Chelsea Kopta, an Amtrak spokesperson. The Amtrak train had 114 passengers and three crew members on board, and no one was injured, Kopta said.


The truck was parked near the tracks while workers made track repairs, according to Meg Reile, a Metra spokesperson. Two track workers were injured and taken to a hospital in Downers Grove, Reile said.

“Every indication I have is that it is still going to be a while before tracks are clear,” Reile said.

Inbound and outbound trains were stopped following the accident. Outbound train No. 1317 was stopped near the incident, but was operating express toward Aurora with extensive delays as of 10:56 p.m., according to Metra.

Passengers on outbound train No. 1319 were transferred to train No. 1317 so train No. 1319 could return to the city to be the 10:45 p.m. outbound BNSF train, Reile said.

Inbound trains No. 1320 and No. 1322 were canceled late Saturday night, and BNSF will not have inbound service until train No. 1324 departs Aurora at 11:20 p.m. Train No. 1324 will most likely have a delayed departure, according to Metra.

Amtrak train 383 was the last train headed to Quincy, so no other Amtrak trains were impacted by the accident.

CROSSING NEWS
Home
The Daily Republic - Rail crossing safety questioned
January 18, 2016
Evan Hendershot

Railroad crossing maintenance has gone off the tracks in recent years, according to two south central South Dakotans.

Former state legislator Frank Kloucek said Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad's (BNSF) crossings from Yankton County to Davison County have been in a serious state of disrepair and are threatening the safety of the drivers crossing the tracks.

Kloucek said there are about six to 10 "dangerous" crossings along the BNSF route from Yankton to Davison counties with rotting planks and protruding railroad spikes.

In response to the range of allegedly dangerous crossings spread throughout the region, Kloucek and other residents have participated in an "outcry of public effort" to get the railroad company to fix the perceived issues. But Kloucek believes it shouldn't be the public's responsibility to address the issue.

"We shouldn't have to do all these things when they claim they've got regular safety inspections and they're all up to date," Kloucek said. "People just roll their eyes when they hear that. It's not believable anymore."

But BNSF's regional director of public affairs, Amy McBeth, said the railroad company conducts weekly track inspections to ensure the safety of its employees and the community.

"The crossings are absolutely safe," McBeth said. "If we did not think the crossings were safe, we would not have them open."

Kloucek and Hutchinson County Highway Superintendent Joe Baumiller, who works in a county with 41 public crossings according to the Federal Railroad Administration, said rotting planks on the crossings are damaging the undercarriages of vehicles. Baumiller also has seen pieces of plastic bumpers and headlights scattered across the site of one crossing in Tripp, while broken sections of plank have the potential to pierce tires.

A major crossing of concern for Kloucek and Baumiller lies along Dakota Street in Tripp. Baumiller said he had to post 5 mph signs along the street approaching the crossing in an effort to limit any vehicle damage or accidents caused by the crossing.

"The one in Tripp, that is just ugly," Baumiller said. "If you drive across that at 2 miles an hour with a car, you're going to hit the bottom of your car."

While Baumiller suggested drivers take caution near crossings, he wondered what might happen if a driver unfamiliar with the area strikes the hole caused by a rotted plank at the crossing. Baumiller said it could result in a crash or even a death.

McBeth boasted BNSF's strong safety record, saying 2014 as its safest year in history and train accidents were reduced by 43 percent from 2005 to 2014. She said the always improving safety record of the railroad network is due, in part, to a preventative safety effort funded by almost $3 billion in infrastructure renewal and maintenance in 2015.

Aside from its weekly inspections, which increase in the event of extreme temperatures or other weather conditions, BNSF also responds to customer concerns. But Kloucek doesn't agree the billion-dollar company is working to prevent safety issues at crossings.

When asked if BNSF is actively addressing local complaints, Kloucek said the company will only pursue a solution in an emergency situation.

"What are they going to do, are they going to wait until somebody gets killed?" Kloucek said.

Kloucek appreciated BNSF's maintenance on a crossing near Kaylor, but he said the company has a lot more work to do in South Dakota to improve what he called a "public hazard." Baumiller, who thanked BNSF for addressing a crossing in Dimock, said it's frustrating to repeatedly ask the company to rehabilitate its crossings elsewhere.

"It just gets a guy mad," Baumiller said. "You know, you call them and call them, and they say, 'Yes, we'll be here, we'll be here.' Well, I don't understand how they're that busy."

As far as the crossing in Tripp, Baumiller's pleas for repairs will soon be answered. McBeth said two Tripp crossings, at Dakota Street and 282nd Street, are on the 2017 maintenance schedule.

While McBeth said railroad maintenance is ongoing, Baumiller still wonders why it takes so long to get projects on the maintenance schedule.

"I know that it's a big railroad, Burlington Northern, I understand that, but they just can't forget about these people in South Dakota," Baumiller said. "The train runs through here just as well as it does down in Omaha."

WAMC (NY) - ‘Schumer Urges CSX To Address Safety Concerns At A Cornwall Crossing
January 15, 2016
Allison Dunne

U.S. Senator Chuck Schumer stood at a rail crossing in Orange County on Thursday to talk about needed safety upgrades. The Democrat says there have been too many accidents and close calls at the site and he’s urging CSX to come to the table.

Kurt Hahn is emergency manager for the Town of Cornwall and Village of Cornwall-on Hudson. He showed Senator Chuck Schumer the area along the CSX tracks in the village where a November 25 accident occurred, the most recent at the site.

(Hahn and Schumer discuss accident along tracks.)

The woman escaped from the car before it caught fire. She was seriously injured. Hahn says some 35 freight trains travel through each day. The crossing is at Donahue Memorial Park, where a gazebo stands along the Hudson River. It’s a popular site, especially for photo ops during prom season. Here’s Schumer.

“So there are too many close calls, narrow escapes, that’s made it clear that we may not be so lucky the next time,” says Schumer. “These accidents have made clear we need to be doing more to both educate motorists and prevent accidents that can happen here. And certainly we don’t want to wait for a fatality because then we know CSX would act like that.”

Rob Doolittle is a CSX spokesman.

“CSX appreciates Senator Schumer’s efforts to bring attention to these important issues in Cornwall-on-Hudson and across the state of New York,” says Doolittle. “Safety is CSX’s highest priority and that includes the safety of the public at the 30,000 grade crossings that are spread across our network.”

Schumer says local officials would like to see longer crossing gates, mobile barriers, and better signage and paving. Schumer says he will push CSX to get on board, to meet with village and town officials soon.

“They’ve got to send representatives to Cornwall first and foremost. And, when did you ask them to Mayor?” asks Schumer.

“Just after the accident November 25,” answers Mayor Brendan Coyne.

“Okay, so we haven’t heard from them yet. I’m going to get them to speak up and give us an answer very shortly, hopefully within the next week,” says Schumer.

That was Cornwall-on-Hudson Mayor Brendan Coyne answering the senior senator from New York. Again, CSX’s Doolittle.

“We’re always happy to meet with officials in the communities where we operate to talk about safety-related issues. We don’t have any record of an invitation to meet with Cornwall-on-Hudson officials on this particular crossing, but we are happy to do so,” Doolittle says. “We also hope that officials from the New York state Department of Transportation will be included because they are essential partners in ensuring the safety of crossings. It’s really up to the state highway department to determine what type of safety signals and guards are appropriate for each crossing and then CSX will install and maintain them, but it’s up to the state highway department to determine what’s necessary. So they’re an essential partner in this process.”

Democratic Assemblyman James Skoufis also stood alongside Schumer calling for safety improvements.

“Government, our primary job is to keep our residents safe, but there’s only so much we can do sometimes. You could pass every law, every regulation. We’re talking about a private company here, CSX. They do need to come to the table,” says Skoufis.  “I join Senator Schumer, our local mayor, supervisor in asking them to come here, take a look.”

In addition to his verbal call, Schumer, who says he has found CSX to be fairly cooperative in other situations, has written a letter to the CSX chairman asking him to send an engineering team immediately to work with Cornwall-on-Hudson officials and work on ways to improve safety.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
Progressive Railroading - California High-Speed Rail Authority inks station funding pact with Burbank
January 15, 2016

The California High-Speed Rail Authority (CHSRA) has entered into a station-area funding agreement with the city of Burbank, Calif., to begin the planning process for a multimodal transportation hub, the authority announced yesterday.

The new facility would incorporate the proposed high-speed rail station, the Regional Intermodal Transportation Center, Amtrak and Metrolink stations, bus services, ride share, and other transportation adjacent to the Burbank Bob Hope Airport, CHRSA officials said in a press release.

The funding agreement allows Burbank and the CHSRA to start studying ways to enhance multimodal connections between the station, the San Fernando Valley and the region, CHSRA officials said.

"The San Fernando Valley is long overdue for a major infrastructure investment of this magnitude," said CHSRA's Southern California Regional Director Michelle Boehm. "This agreement creates a unique regional planning opportunity that will help facilitate development of a world class transportation hub, increase the quality and types of transportation choices available to residents and visitors to the San Fernando Valley, and makes significant progress in bringing high-speed rail to the region."

As part of the agreement, Burbank will receive $800,000 to explore options and seek public input for station-area design and development. The money will support planning efforts focused on both the integration of the high-speed rail station into the region and the analysis of opportunities to promote economic development and sustainable community strategies, CHSRA officials said.

The agency provides station-area funds through a combination of federal and state funds to help partner cities conduct planning efforts and develop conceptual designs to provide connections between high-speed rail station areas and the communities around them. Other partner cities that have entered into similar agreements include Merced, Fresno, Bakersfield, Gilroy and Palmdale, Calif.

HHFT
Home
Desmog Blog - There Will Be Blood - Oil Train Regulations Fail To Address Known Risks
January 17, 2016
Justin Mikulka

“Railroad rules have been written in blood.” This line was included in the annual report of the Commissioner of Railroads for the state of Michigan — in 1901. The idea was that safety rules were only implemented when enough blood had been spilled.

One hundred and fifteen years later, in an opinion piece on rail safety for CNN, rail expert Fred Failey essentially said the same thing, opening his piece with the statement, “The rules by which trains operate on American railroads were written in blood.”

When it comes to the rules regarding oil trains in America, many regulations that would improve safety have yet to be written. One reason is that, despite the multiple oil train crashes resulting in massive explosions in the past several years, there have been no fatalities in America.

Although 47 people did die in the Lac-Megantic oil train crash just north of the Maine border in Canada, that apparently isn’t enough to change the tradition of the rail industry fighting any regulations that might improve public safety.
  

The Oil-By-Rail Industry Doesn’t Want to Be Regulated

An investigation by the Federal Railroad Administration(FRA) into the Mount Carbon oil train derailment concluded that the cause of the accident was a broken rail. At that time, Sarah Feinberg, the FRA’s acting administrator, noted that, “Broken rail is one of the leading causes of accidents.”

So what are the regulations regarding rails becoming worn and increasing the risk of derailments? There are none.

As the Associated Press (AP) reported in December, efforts to improve safety via rail wear regulations were stopped by the rail industry in 2013 in favor of “voluntary” safety measures.

Richard Inclima, head of the union representing rail inspectors, summed up the reality of what happened, “There was certainly a lot of pushback and a lot of political pressure put on FRA not to adopt regulations for rail wear. The industry doesn’t want to be regulated. That’s no secret.”

Following the Mount Carbon accident, the FRA is making plans to once again try for rail wear regulations.

FRA confirmed to DeSmog,“The Federal Railroad Administration has started its internal process to move forward with a rule to establish rail wear standards.”

Of course, the industry will once again flex its lobbying muscle to create “a lot of pushback and a lot of political pressure.” And these rulemaking processes take years. So, there is a well-established known risk and leading contributor to derailments — and still no regulations while the bomb trains roll on — because the industry doesn’t want them.

Modern Braking System Regulation Challenged in Transportation Bill

The new regulations released in May 2015 require oil trains to have modern electronically controlled pneumatic (ECP) braking systems by 2021. Last year Matt Lehner, communications director for the administration, clearly stated the administration’s support for ECP brakes.

“ECP brakes are a proven technology that will reduce the number of train derailments and keep more tank cars on the track if a train does derail. Delaying the adoption of ECP brakes seriously jeopardizes the citizens and communities along our nation's freight network.”

The brakes currently used on oil trains are air brakes, a technology developed in the 1870s. That 1901 report noted, “Considerable progress has been made in the equipment of freight cars with air brakes.”

The report also noted that new passenger cars had modern gas lighting. The lighting technology has been updated on current trains. The brakes have not.

However, as reported on DeSmog, in June the head of BNSF railroad stated he will not stand for this regulation. Last year, a Senate subcommittee tried to remove the ECP requirements from the regulations but the effort did not move forward.

Good news for all of those citizens and communities along our nation’s freight network, right?  Not so fast. The transportation bill passed at the end of 2015 provides the framework for the industry to remove the ECP braking requirement.

The bill includes a section that outlines how a study will be done on the effectiveness of ECP braking systems — a study of what the Federal Railroad Administration calls “a proven technology.”

And if the study finds that the costs of modern ECP brakes outweigh the benefits, then the Secretary of Transportation must “repeal the applicable ECP brake system requirements.”

Meanwhile, in the past year, the Association of American Railroads ran ads saying that data doesn’t support the use of ECP brakes.

More delays. More challenges of a proven technology. And another workaround for the industry. It seems clear that the Federal Railroad Administration is not calling the shots when it comes to safety regulations.

Dangerous Tank Cars to be Phased Out Sooner…Or Not

The transportation bill also addresses the flawed DOT-111 tank cars and appears to move up the phase out schedule for using the DOT-111 to move volatile crude oil. This resulted in very misleading headlines like “New Highway Bill Includes Tough Rules for Oil Trains” noting how DOT-111’s will be off the rails by 2018.

Except there is a catch. The bill states, “The Secretary may extend the deadlines…if the Secretary determines that insufficient retrofitting shop capacity will prevent the phase-out of tank cars.”

The language of this is interesting. Guess who has been adamant that the retrofit deadlines are too short and that “shop capacity” will not allow the industry to meet them? The American Petroleum Institute.

So it appears that everything is set up for an extension with the American Petroleum Institute’s language and reasoning included in the new bill. So much for “tough” new rules.  

Volatile Bakken Oil

There are no federal regulations regarding the volatile components of Bakken oil — a recipe that makes it such a “bomb train” danger. Recently, the Attorney General of New York petitioned the federal regulators to address this issue.

As noted on DeSmog repeatedly, the science about the volatility of the Bakken oil is well known and the risk can be reduced via a process known as stabilization. Addressing this is even something the Secretary of Transportation wanted to include in the federal regulations.

But the White House took stabilization off the table.

The new transportation bill also mentions volatility. As with the braking issue, there will now be yet more study of something that is clearly established science.

Earlier this year, Al Jazeera reported the views of an oil scientist on the absurdity of continuing to study what has been known for 80 years.

“The notion that this requires significant research and development is a bunch of BS,” said Ramanan Krishnamoorti, a professor of petroleum engineering at the University of Houston. “The science behind this has been revealed over 80 years ago, and developing a simple spreadsheet to calculate risk based on composition and vapor pressure is trivial. This can be done today.”

So will this new study required by the transportation bill reaffirm science that has been known for 80 years?

Or will it provide another out for the oil industry so they don’t have to address the volatility of the oil? Will the next transportation secretary once again be overruled when it comes to real safety regulations?

We should have answers to some of those questions in a couple of years. Meanwhile, the oil trains continue to roll through communities across North America.

Train Length

One of the suspected causes of the oil train derailments is the length of the trains. Doug Finnson, president of the Teamsters Rail Conference of Canada, explained this to CBC News after an oil train derailment in Canada last year saying, “These trains are likely too long, too heavy and going too fast for the track conditions in place.”

So what do the regulations say about train length? How long is too long?

There are no regulations for train length. And none are proposed.

Of course, longer trains are more profitable.

Unattended Trains - A Case Study in Watering Down Regulation

The train that caused the Lac-Megantic disaster was left unlocked and unattended on a section of tracks less than 20 feet from the main road headed into Lac-Megantic. There were no fences and the train was accessible to anyone.

That disaster would have been prevented if the train was attended. But having staff on a train that isn’t moving costs extra money, so the railroads don’t do it.

After that accident, regulators took notice. And on the surface it appeared the Federal Railroad Administration’s Emergency Order 28, issued after Lac-Megantic, required that such trains not be left unattended. Unless the railroads provided a plan showing why it was ok to leave them unattended.

However, the FRA won’t be reviewing the plans and simply maintains the right to get “a copy of the plan upon request.” 

Not everyone was happy with this proposal, and in the rule Riverkeeper’s comments were noted:

“Riverkeeper notes that the equipment defined under paragraph (n)(6) can be left unattended if a justification is provided to FRA, characterizing this allowance as a “loophole.” Riverkeeper also criticizes FRA's decision to reserve the right to review any plan as an “abrogation of responsibility” and asserts that railroads should not be left to develop their own plans without FRA review.”

But those concerns were dismissed with the next line: “FRA disagrees with Riverkeeper's characterization.”

So in reality, what has changed since the Lac-Megantic disaster?

A loaded Bakken oil train can still be left unattended on a hill above a community. But according to the new regulations, the door to the locomotive will have to be locked. As of March 2017. Nearly four years after 47 people were killed in Lac-Megantic.

Having a locked door on the Lac-Megantic train would not have prevented that disaster.

A Banner Year

In the annual report on Michigan’s railroads from 1901, there was good news for the rail industry. It showed “the amount of income for the year 1900 to be the greatest for the railroad business in this State.”  

However, there was some bad news as well. “There was the usual record of accidents and some of them were dreadful in the extreme.”

Record income, and “the usual” record of dreadful accidents. So what was recommended?

“The idea of calling a meeting of the operating railroad men for the purpose of having a discussion of the question to the end that the code of train rules be made as perfect as possible, and the danger of accident be reduced to a minimum.”

Much like in 1901, the current regulation of the rail industry is driven by meetings of “railroad men” talking about regulations.

And as the Associated Press reported in 2015, “the industry doesn’t want to be regulated.” So they aren’t.

AMTRAK
Home
WNPR - Plans for New York's Penn Station Include a Link to Metro-North
January 15, 2016
Heather Brandon

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo has some big changes planned for Penn Station in New York City. Among them: he wants to connect it to Metro-North, with a plan to build four new stations in The Bronx.

Penn Station is not the most beautiful gateway to the city, and Cuomo has acknowledged that. He wants to improve the station as an experience, so the place is less like a dark rat’s maze, and more of a dignified entry point for city visitors and residents.

Cuomo also wants to make Penn Station even more of a major hub for transportation. It’s already the place to catch an Amtrak train, and the bus terminal is nearby. MegaBus also operates in the area, and the Long Island Railroad connects to Penn. Cuomo wants to enhance these connections with a new tunnel underneath the Hudson River and an expansion of the LIRR with an additional track. He also wants to establish a rail connection from Penn to La Guardia Airport.

Adding a connection to Metro-North could streamline the travel experience for commuters from Connecticut and all of New England. It means travelers could take a bus from points north to a Metro-North station in Connecticut, and easily reach a lot of other places in the country – without having to go through Grand Central Station first.

On WNPR’s Where We Live, WNYC senior editor Matthew Schuerman explained the idea of connecting Metro-North and Penn Station. “The idea has been around for about 15 years or so,” he said. “It would tap the Metro-North New Haven line into Amtrak’s line, which goes actually from The Bronx into Queens, and then from Queens into Manhattan – unlike the New Haven line now, which goes directly from The Bronx down Manhattan, down Park Avenue.”

It would only require three miles worth of new track, Schuerman said.

“But the other thing he’s working on – and the part of it that’s really gotten a lot of attention down here -- is to redevelop Penn Station itself,” Schuerman said. “It was once this grand landmark. It was torn down in the early 60s, and basically subverted below Madison Square Garden. So he has put out a couple of different options that would simply bring more sunlight down into the tracks, reconfigure a lot of the concourses down there, and make it a more pleasant commuting experience.”

In his State of the State address this week, Cuomo called Penn Station miserable, grossly over capacity and underperforming. “Amtrak owns it,” he said. “It is unwelcoming, and it is unacceptable. If Vice President Biden was critical of La Guardia airport, we’re only lucky he didn’t take a train and end at Penn.”

Schuerman said people have been complaining about Penn Station ever since the original station was torn down. “It’s hard to navigate; it’s dark; it’s miserable; it’s crowded – all of those things that he talked about,” Schuerman said. “And you may know that there has been a similar plan on the drawing board for about 20 years.”

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan developed a plan to convert the post office near Penn Station into a train concourse years ago. Some construction has even been underway, and Schuerman said it'll open later this year.

For now, Cuomo has invited bids from developers, due within 90 days. Cuomo's office has said it could cost around $3 billion.

Newsworks- Coalition calls for new Amtrak station in Buffalo
January 18, 2016
Chris Caya

The Partnership for the Public Good has released its annual policy agenda Friday. The initiatives are developed in cooperation with more than 200 non-profit and community groups.

Much of the focus is on social issues like  election reform, paid family leave and community policing. There is also a call for a new multi-modal transportation center.

"I think with all the excitement around downtown, people are frankly embarrassed by the Amtrak station downtown," said  PPG co-director Sam Magavern. 

"They know that Niagara Falls, Syracuse, Albany, Rochester--- all the other main stops on the main line--- have gotten new Amtrak stations,  so it's kind of our turn."

The PPG and its hundreds of partners compile the agenda to help identify top policy actions that state and local government can act on in the coming year to improve the quality of life across the region.

Some of the other priorities that PPG will be urging state and local government to act on this year include fair elections in the City of Buffalo, raising the age of criminal responsibility in New York State, community policing and paid family leave.

Newsworks- Passenger train service on America's Northeast Corridor could get a lot faster
January 15, 2016

By 2040, your trips to Washington, D.C., New York and Boston may be getting faster. How much faster, exactly, depends on which of three plans that the Federal Railroad Administration approves. 

The FRA held a meeting for public comment on drafts of potential plans for maintaining or improving Northeast Corridor rail service – the route between Washington D.C. and Boston – Monday at SEPTA’s headquarters in Center City Philadelphia. There are three potential plans, ranging from slight tweaks along the corridor to reduce choke points to major overhauls of infrastructure and routes that could accommodate high-speed rail.

Transform

The most ambitious – and expensive, estimated to cost between $267-$308 billion dollars – of the plans calls for digging a tunnel underneath Center City and opening a new station in Market East section. This would allow high-speed trains to service the city – a daunting task for 30th Street Station because of the horseshoe-shaped curves approaching the station from the north and south, which cause trains to slow considerably.

If implemented, a trip from Boston to D.C. would be reduced from 6 hours, 30 minutes to 3 hours, according to the FRA. Currently that trip on an Amtrak's Acela train takes about six and a half hours. The plan also calls for a new station to be built for the Philadelphia International Airport, which would give Amtrak passengers a direct connection. 

Throughout the entire Northeast Corridor, this plan – dubbed “Transform”– calls for a “spine” of parallel tracks that would be built from D.C. to New York City, greatly increasing the number of riders that the corridor’s rail could serve. From New York City to Boston, several new routes would be considered through New England and Long Island.

This costly plan drew the most criticism from commenters. 

“This Philadelphia tunnel is something we don’t need,” says Scott Maitz a local transportation activist. Instead, it’s better to continuing to run trains through 30th Street because that’s where downtown Philly is expanding, he says, citing recent investments made in the area as that neighborhood grows. 

Michael Noda, author of the Sic Transit Philadelphia transit blog, went further and decried the cost of the whole plan, including the tunnel beneath Center City. “We cannot be committing ourselves to spend twice as much as the Japanese are spending on maglev between Tokyo and Nagoya on a vision of high speed rail that only reaches between Boston and Washington [D.C.].”

The two other plans – dubbed the “Maintain” and “Grow” options – are less transformative for Philadelphia, but would still save travelers time along the whole corridor by reducing bottlenecks along the route, as well as by increasing capacity for new riders and helping to make the system more resilient to climate change.

Maintain

The most basic plan – “Maintain” – includes a few big projects, none of them in Philadelphia: new tunnels under Baltimore and between New Jersey and New York, as well as some new tracks through Connecticut and Rhode Island. Several smaller tweaks along the route would make the trip from D.C. to Boston around 35 minutes shorter.

Grow

The second plan – “Grow” – would slightly straighten the tracks north of 30th Street Station and in North Philadelphia. This plan, like “Transform” above, also adds a stop for the airport on a new segment of track south of the city. Travel time between D.C. and Boston would be reduced by an hour and five minutes.

All of these plans are compared against a baseline plan, in which no new action is taken and the infrastructure is maintained but not improved. That means relying on century-old infrastructure in some places – most famously, the 100-year-old tunnels between New York City and New Jersey under the Hudson River that were damaged by Superstorm Sandy and whose partial failure this past summer caused a nightmare for commuters in North Jersey and New York. This plan, called the “no action” plan, would not increase the corridor’s ability to keep up with expected population growth in cities along the route, the FRA said.

But these three plans are not all or nothing, FRA officials said. Elements of each can be swapped or combined with each other based on further analysis, comments received, and other considerations. The FRA will announce their final preferred plan this spring. A final “service development plan,” which prioritizes a list of projects along the corridor, will be released in 2017. Construction on projects along the corridor may start anytime after that, though no specific timetable has been set.

Background

 The Northeast Corridor carries 750,000 rail passengers per day and is the busiest rail corridor in the country. The Northeast Corridor alone contributes over $3 trillion to the economy each year, or about 21 percent of the nation’s GDP, according to the FRA’s report, making it a vital corridor for the entire country.

The meeting in Philadelphia was just one of 11 meetings that are taking place between Boston and D.C. The official comment period is open until January 30th, and can be given in person at a public meeting or online.

Associated Press - Amtrak to add business-class seating to Cardinal route
January 15, 2016

CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Amtrak has announced it will add business-class seating to its Cardinal route.

The new service was announced Monday and will start Jan. 20.

The service will allow travelers to reserve seating in a business-class car. Travelers will also have access to complimentary Wi-Fi, soft drinks, more spacious seating, complimentary access to the Metropolitan Lounge at Chicago's Union Station and an access pass for Philadelphia's ClubAcela lounge.

Amtrak's Cardinal route links Charleston to New York, Washington, Cincinnati, Chicago and other cities.

Over the years, Congress has contemplated possible cutbacks for the route. Charleston Mayor Danny Jones says they will not remove Amtrak out of the city.

The News Tribune - Amtrak station construction to begin this spring
January 15, 2016
John Gillie

With the politically arduous site selection and design process finally behind it, the Washington Department of Transportation says it will begin construction of Tacoma’s new Amtrak station at Freighthouse Square this spring.

The new station is necessary because Amtrak passenger trains will start using a new route through Tacoma in 2017. The existing Amtrak station on Puyallup Avenue is on the waterfront route Amtrak trains now use. The new station will be on a line that cuts through South Tacoma to rejoin the BNSF Railway main line near Nisqually.

The South Tacoma route will help cut eight minutes from the Seattle-to-Portland timetable and will relieve congestion on the waterfront line constricted by the single-track Nelson Bennett Tunnel under Point Defiance.

WSDOT spokeswoman Janet Matkin said architects are finishing final plans for the station. The department is scheduled to advertise for bids for demolition and construction in February, with construction to start in mid-spring.

The department spent nearly two years working with the Tacoma community to determine where the new station would located and how it would look.

The outreach effort came after an initial design met strong criticism from Tacoma civic leaders and residents.

The new station will be in the middle section of the former Milwaukee Road railroad warehouse now called Freighthouse Square. The middle portion of the historic 1,000-foot-long building at East 25th and D streets near the Tacoma Dome will be demolished and the new station will be built on the building’s footprint.

The department and Freighthouse Square owner Brian Borgelt are negotiating price and terms of the building’s sale.

“I’d like to think that we’re very close to an agreement,” said Borgelt on Friday. “Negotiating with the state is a very strange, compartmentalized process.”

The process requires negotiating with different divisions of the transportation department, he said.

“There’s been a lot of going back and forth,” Borgelt said.

One of Borgelt’s objectives during talks is protecting the businesses in other parts of Freighthouse Square during and after construction.

“Our concern is keeping everybody viable during the construction and demolition,” he said. Borgelt has already moved tenants out of the section to be razed, which is west of the Sound Transit Sounder commuter rail station.

Freighthouse Square houses a variety of merchants and restaurants, including a popular food court and an event venue at the building’s east end.

The station’s construction is part of an $89 million Point Defiance Bypass project that will make possible the shortcut route for Amtrak trains. The project is funded by the federal government. The route, which leaves the BNSF main line near the Puyallup Tribe’s Emerald Queen casino, follows a former Tacoma Rail industrial line through Nalley Valley, South Tacoma and Lakewood to Dupont. At Nisqually, the line rejoins the BNSF route. While much of the line was rehabilitated for Sounder commuter rail service to Lakewood, further improvements are being made on the route between Lakewood and Nisqually.

The Point Defiance Bypass project is part of an effort to improve passenger train speed and reliability on the Cascade corridor between Vancouver, B.C. and Portland. The new route will allow the state and Amtrak to add two daily passenger roundtrips to its schedule between the Emerald City and Portland. Five daily passenger trains travel each way on the route now. The number will increase to seven in 2017.

STATE BY STATE
Home
Argus Leader - Letter: Safety is freight rail industry priority
January 15, 2016

In response to the Jan. 9 Argus Leader story, “South Dakota lags in rail safety,” readers need to know that for the nation’s freight railroads, including those operating throughout South Dakota, nothing is more important than safety.

Railroads have taken many actions to advance safety, including increasing track inspections and trackside technologies, using sophisticated routing technology that determines the safest and most secure rail routes for moving crude oil trains and stepping up hands-on preparedness and training of firefighters.

First responders also have access to a mobile application called AskRail, which gives immediate and accurate information about railcars carrying hazardous materials. This is being used today across the country.

Federal statistics show rail safety has been dramatically improving over the last several decades. Department of Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx, when speaking about crude oil shipments, said, “The truth is that 99.99 percent of these shipments reach their destination safely.”

Freight railroads spend billions every year on maintaining and modernizing America’s freight rail system, as well as millions more on research and testing of new track safety technologies. Our industry’s goal is to make a safe rail network even safer.

Sun Herald (MS) - Study inches New Orleans-to-Mobile passenger train closer to reality
January 15, 2016
Paul Hampton

GULFPORT -- If an Orlando-New Orleans Amtrak route materializes, Coast cities will be waiting at the station.

"Here in Biloxi, we're well-positioned," Biloxi Mayor "FoFo" Gilich said. "Our Biloxi Transit Center in our downtown has the waiting area, the ticket windows, the parking space, the cab service, thousands of hotel rooms a short drive or walk away -- and let's not forget MGM Park.

"This multi-model transit center is not where it is by accident. All we need is a good platform at the railway, and we're ready to say 'Welcome to Biloxi' or 'All aboard,' depending on if they're coming or going."

Although an Amtrak study found passenger service here is feasible, it won't arrive without a substantial investment -- either by the state, federal government, the cities on the route or some combination of those governmental units.

Amtrak did the study of rail-service options for the Southern Rail Commission, a group advocating for a resumption of rail service. It said extending the City of New Orleans route that runs from Chicago to New Orleans on to Orlando and combining it with a daily state-supported New Orleans-to-Mobile round-trip route would give the best balance of operating costs and ridership benefits. That option, it found, would require $9.49 million a year in equipment and operating expenses. It figured that route would generate a ridership of 153,900.

Taking out the daily New Orleans-to-Mobile round trip would reduce the cost to $5.48 million annually and reduce ridership to 138,300, Amtrak predicted.

Gulfport Mayor Billy Hewes said he anticipates most of the money will come from the federal government.

"Then it's a matter of getting the ridership up to sustain that funding," Hewes said.

He's optimistic that will happen if the trains run on time.

"Any time you can bring more people to the Coast, that's a positive," he said. "It would be a great experience. There are generations who have never had a train ride. From that standpoint, it would be a novelty."

The Coast has had passenger service several times. A train ran between Mobile and New Orleans in 1984 in conjunction with the Louisiana World's Fair Exposition. In 1993, Amtrak extended the Los Angeles-to-New Orleans Sunset Limited run through the Coast and on to Miami. That included a New Orleans-to-Mobile service, which ended in 1997. But the Sunset Limited extension was plagued by a poor on-time record and it ended the same month Katrina hammered the Coast.

Even before the Coast recovered from the storm local officials were talking about returning rail service.

"The most important thing about this Amtrak study is that is it an acknowledgement that daily passenger rail service for the Gulf Coast is viable," said Gilich. "The daily service is something that Biloxi, the cities on the Gulf Coast and the Southern Rail Commission have advocated for years. This is about economic and tourism development across the Gulf Coast."

Read more here: http://www.sunherald.com/news/business/article55005875.html#storylink=cpy





3


