 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 14, 2016
TV & RADIO
Danger on the Tracks	2
FRA Host Northeast Corridor Hearing in Hartford	2
NTSB 2016 “Most Wanted List” Includes PTC	2
NTSB Warning on Trains without PTC	2
Victim Identified in Train Crash	2
Rail Safety Tops NTSB “Most Wanted List”	2
NATIONAL NEWS
The Washington Post - NTSB’s ‘10 Most Wanted’ list for 2016 underscores need for rail safety	2
RT&S - Hamberger shares the industry’s 2016 goals, sums up 2015 achievements	3
Progressive Railroading - Rail unions petition FRA for uniform speed signs	4
RAIL INCIDENTS
Daily Bulletin - Woman dead in Metrolink train crash in Rancho Cucamonga	5
HIGH SPEED RAIL
Associated Press - 33 Texas officials send Japanese Ambassador letter opposing high-speed train	5
HHFT
Associated Press - CSX predicts challenging year for railroad in 2016	6
AMTRAK
Wall Street Journal - Port Authority Chairman Questions Funding on Penn Station Revamp	7
NJ.com – Editorial:  Penn Station is a crucial project, which benefits New Jersey	9
Plan Philly - FRA presents expensive, alternative futures for Amtrak's Northeast Corridor	11
Lagniappe Weekly (AL) - Amtrak releases study on return of passenger rail service	12
STATE BY STATE
CT Post - Rail hearing draws disparate voices	14
Press Republican (NY) - Railroad inspections find minor issues	15
Associated Press - The shining: UK commuters told trains delayed by sunlight	16
Whitefish Pilot - Rail safety focus of roundtable	17


TV & RADIO
Home
Danger on the Tracks
http://media.bulletinintelligence.com/playclip.aspx?clipid=8d31c591b483d9c&pub=dot&pub=dot#2016011408084770192211110

FRA Host Northeast Corridor Hearing in Hartford
WTIC-HFD (FOX) - Hartford-New Haven, CT

NTSB 2016 “Most Wanted List” Includes PTC
News 12 Long Island - New York, NY

NTSB Warning on Trains without PTC
KFYR (NBC) - Minot, ND

Victim Identified in Train Crash
KWES (NBC) - Odessa, TX

Rail Safety Tops NTSB “Most Wanted List”
WRC-DC (NBC) - Washington, D.C.

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
The Washington Post - NTSB’s ‘10 Most Wanted’ list for 2016 underscores need for rail safety
January 13, 2016
Ashley Halsey III

The risk of a disastrous tank car explosion in a major city and preventing tragedies like last year’s fatal Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia dominated the discussion Wednesday as the National Transportation Safety Board issued its priorities for 2016.

The NTSB sent a stern message to Congress and federal regulators about the potential consequences of delays in installing automatic-breaking technology to prevent high-speed derailments and in replacing rail tank cars that carry volatile flammable loads.

NTSB Chairman Christopher A. Hart invoked the memory of a runaway train that derailed in flames in Lac-Mégantic, Canada, in 2013, killing 47 people and burning down more than 30 buildings.

“We’ve been lucky thus far that derailments involving flammable liquids in America have not yet occurred in a populated area,” Hart said. “But an American version of Lac-Mégantic could happen at any time. Instead of happening out in the middle of a wheat field it could happen in the middle of a big city.”

He said a federal requirement that railroads replace tank cars with a safer generation of tankers by 2025 was “much too long” to wait.

NTSB board member Robert L. Sumwalt, who headed a safety board delegation sent to the Philadelphia Amtrak crash that killed eight and injured more than 200 last May, said a congressional decision to extend the deadline for installing automatic-breaking technology known as Positive Train Control was “very frustrating.”

“Every day that PTC is not in place we run the risk of another Amtrak crash,” Sumwalt said, declining to say whether Congress or the railroads deserved most of the blame. “And it’s irresponsible. Is it going to take another five years or another three years for it to be implemented? If that’s the case, that’s unacceptable.”

Federal Railroad Administration head Sarah Feinberg has made clear she intends to hold the railroads to strict deadlines to expedite PTC installation and get the outmoded DOT 111 tank cars replaced.

RT&S - Hamberger shares the industry’s 2016 goals, sums up 2015 achievements
January 13, 2016

Association of American Railroads (AAR) President and Chief Executive Officer Edward Hamberger says that the industry will be targeting several key issues in 2016, such as maintaining balanced economic regulation at the Surface Transportation Board (STB), extending the shortline tax credit while laying the groundwork for overall tax reform and advancing security-safety legislation or regulation.
 

With freight rail companies facing a deadline later this month to provide the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) with plans to implement Positive Train Control (PTC) deadline technology, the AAR reaffirmed the industry's stance that the technology will be fully installed where required by 2018 and all testing for full coast-to-coast operations completed by 2020.

The remarks by Hamberger were made at the 246th regular meeting of the Midwest Association of Rail Shippers as part of a panel titled, "Just what we need, more 'help' from Washington."

"The past year brought much excitement and success for the freight rail industry, both from a service perspective and in terms of regulatory and legislative activity," said Hamberger, before speaking on a panel with Dave Manning, vice chair of the American Truckers Association. "We take very seriously our mission to deliver our customers' goods efficiently, reliably and safely and look forward to our continued partnerships."

Hamberger also addressed several successes from the past year for those in attendance, including stopping efforts to increase truck weights, pushing for safer tank cars moving flammable liquids, such as crude oil and achieving common sense reform in environmental permitting.

He also thanked the audience of rail customers for their support in pushing for an extension of the PTC deadline.

"It would have never happened had not freight rail's customers let Washington, D.C., know the devastating impacts a rail shut down would have on American businesses and jobs," he said.

Hamberger also mentioned a long-term project that will be getting a stepped-up focus in 2016: working with other industries and government to review the rulemaking process and improve a regulatory system that at times limits innovation and efficiencies. Hamberger argued that with a still-soft economy, American industry requires empirically-driven policy rooted in sound science.

Progressive Railroading - Rail unions petition FRA for uniform speed signs
January 13, 2016

The SMART Transportation Division and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen have submitted a petition to the Federal Railroad Administration for a rulemaking that mandates uniform warning speed signs in advance of a permanent speed restriction, union officials announced yesterday.

Some railroads have started removing these signs, which creates a hazard for operating crews and the public, according to the petition.

"Just as it is unreasonable for a motorist to know each speed restriction without a warning, the same is true for railroad crews," the unions wrote in the petition. "Unlike automobile travel, where speeds can be reduced promptly, trains are unable to comply with a speed restriction without prior knowledge."

The unions also asked for the standardization of the signs' dimensions, conspicuousness and color.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Daily Bulletin - Woman dead in Metrolink train crash in Rancho Cucamonga
January 12, 2016
Beatriz Valenzuela

RANCHO CUCAMONGA >> An 88-year-old woman was killed when a Metrolink train struck a vehicle in Rancho Cucamonga Tuesday afternoon, according to witnesses and San Bernardino County Sheriff’s officials.

The crash was first reported before 12:30 p.m. on the tracks near Vineyard Avenue and Eighth Street, resulting in Eighth Street being shut down between Hellman and Vineyard avenues, according to sheriff’s reports.


The woman who died at the scene was in the vehicle. She is from Rancho Cucamonga, according to the sheriff’s department.

It’s unclear if the vehicle was trying to beat the train when the collision took place.

The crash has led to at least one other Los Angeles-bound train being delayed about an hour, according to Scott Johnson with Metrolink.

Authorities are searching for alternate transportation for the stranded passengers.

At the time of the crash, there were 75 passengers on the train, which was traveling eastbound to San Bernardino.

Johnson said that at the time of the crash, the crossing arms were down and the lights and alarms were working properly.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
Associated Press - 33 Texas officials send Japanese Ambassador letter opposing high-speed train
January 13, 2016
Carol Christian

The Japanese Ambassador to the United States may be scratching his head over a recent letter signed by 33 officials in East Texas.

Sent Monday, the letter from state legislators and other officials plunges right in stating "deep opposition" to the Texas Central Railway High-Speed Rail Project.

As proposed, the 200-mph train between Houston and Dallas would use Japanese Shinkansen "bullet train" technology. Texas Central Partners, a private company,  plans to start construction of the 240-mile route next year, with service slated to begin in 2021.

This week, the letter writers turned to Ambassador Kenichiro Sasae in Washington, DC, for help in stopping the project they say will harm local communities.
"Through their recently formed U.S. companies, the HSR Project would unjustly take private property for the ultimate benefit of a foreign company," the letter states.

"Furthermore, the HSR Project will cut through numerous counties that will have no stops and be permanently scarred by a track dividing land and property that has been passed down through Texas families for generations, in many cases spanning multiple centuries," the letter continues.

The 33 signatures on the letter included those of 11 Republican state Legislators, including State Sen. Lois Kolkhorst of Brenham and State Rep. Will Metcalf of Conroe.

The Japanese Embassy did not immediately respond to a request for comment Wednesday. 

A study released in October showed that the project would inject $36 billion into the state's economy, but the report hasn't quelled opposition.

In August, the Federal Railroad Administration approved the 240-mile rail corridor preferred by the developers of the Dallas-Houston train.

HHFT
Home
Associated Press - CSX predicts challenging year for railroad in 2016
January 13, 2016
Josh Funk

OMAHA, Neb. (AP) — CSX Corp. expects to deliver lower profits in 2016 as weak demand for coal and crude oil persists and the strong U.S. dollar continues to limit exports.

The railroad's forecast for lower freight volume suggests the overall U.S. economy may be slowing after several years of steady growth.

"We're calling it almost a freight recession," Chairman and CEO Michael Ward said Wednesday. "We really think there are some challenges on the industrial side of the economy."

The railroad's fourth-quarter results showed an overall 6 percent drop in all shipments. Coal led the decline with a 32 percent drop in carloads, but few sectors showed any growth.

Ward said the railroad will continue working to improve productivity and cut about $200 million in expenses in 2016.
CSX also plans to reduce its capital spending this year by $100 million to $2.4 billion and park some older, less-efficient locomotives that aren't needed.

"2016 will be a more challenging year," Ward said. "Volume in the first quarter and for the full year will decline as growth in some markets continues to be offset by the significant impact of continued coal declines, low commodity prices and a strong US dollar."

Coal demand has fallen significantly over the past several years because of environmental concerns and because cheap natural gas prices prompted some utilities to switch fuels.

Intermodal shipments of containers that arrive in ports via ship grew 4 percent for one of the only major bright spots in CSX's traffic report. Automotive shipments improved 5 percent in the quarter.

The Jacksonville, Florida-based railroad said Tuesday its fourth-quarter profit declined 5 percent to $466 million, or 48 cents per share, on $2.78 billion revenue.

The quarterly results were helped by a one-time property sale that added $80 million, or 5 cents per share, to CSX's profit. Analysts surveyed by Zacks Investment Research expected adjusted earnings of 46 cents per share.

Citi analyst Christian Wetherbee said the railroad's results were better than he expected thanks to tight cost controls.

CSX operates more than 21,000 miles of track in 23 Eastern states and two Canadian provinces.

Its shares fell $1.67, or 7.1 percent, to $22.03 in afternoon trading Wednesday. Its shares are down more than 34 percent over the past year.

AMTRAK
Home
Wall Street Journal - Port Authority Chairman Questions Funding on Penn Station Revamp
January 12, 2016
Andrew Tangel

The chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is questioning his agency’s potential contribution of nearly half the public funding expected for a recently proposed overhaul of New York’s Penn Station.

The revamp of the Midtown Manhattan station complex is estimated to cost more than $3 billion, and private developers are expected to pay for nearly all of it. Government funds are expected to take care of the remaining $325 million, of which $150 million is to come from the Port Authority.

But John Degnan, the Port Authority chairman, is asking the agency’s staff about the expected financing at a time when it also needs to come up with funding for other big projects.

The questions about financing come in the early stages of a plan announced last week to overhaul Penn and revive a long-stalled effort to build a train hall inside a neighboring post-office building—a project New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo dubbed the Empire Station Complex.

At issue is a 15-year-old agreement under which the Port Authority would pay $10.5 million annually over 35 years to lease 250 square feet inside the new train hall for two ticket counters and a kiosk.

The Port Authority’s expected rental payments—its share of the $325 million government contribution toward the Empire Station project—were valued at $150 million, according to a Cuomo administration official.

The terms of this unexecuted lease deal shifted significantly during negotiations in 2000. Initially the Port Authority agreed to $8.3 million annual rental payments for 40,000 square feet.

Mr. Degnan, a New Jersey appointee who became Port Authority chairman in July 2014, has peppered the agency’s staff with questions, including how to justify the unexecuted lease deal “in the face of the dramatic reduction of leased space” yet increased rent, according to a memo sent Saturday that was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.

Mr. Degnan noted in the memo that the agency hadn’t factored lease payments into its capital and operating plans. He questioned the lease’s current market value and its accounting treatment, and said the Port Authority board would revisit the deal at its February meeting.

A state official said the Cuomo administration is “confident that this vital project will be funded and completed.”

In a brief interview, Mr. Degnan said the Port Authority board had a fiduciary responsibility to determine whether the agency should still honor the lease and “confirm that it was properly handled.”

“If those funds for any reason are no longer available for Penn Station, then the board should consider whether, in the context of the capital plan and other competing needs, we are able to make a financial contribution to an otherwise worthy project,” Mr. Degnan said.

The Port Authority operates major New York City airports, the PATH train between New York and New Jersey and major bridges and tunnels between both states. It is largely funded by tolls and airport fees.

Officials there have been grappling with how to pay for an increasing list of major projects, including a replacement of its aging Port Authority Bus Terminal in Midtown Manhattan and an overhaul of La Guardia Airport.

The Port Authority is also planning to play a major role in digging two new Hudson River rail tunnels, part of Amtrak’s Gateway project. The estimated $15 billion to $20 billion plan would also expand the current Penn Station, making way for new tracks and platforms for more trains.

Mr. Cuomo’s separate Empire Station plan aims to bring more natural light and improved passenger flow to remake Penn, which has long widely bemoaned by travelers, transportation experts and civic groups.

His plan would revive the stalled effort to put a train hall in the James A. Farley Post Office building, a project long known as Moynihan Station.

Patrick Foye, a Cuomo appointee who is the Port Authority’s executive director, said the “new train hall would benefit commuters in both states and beyond.”

Solicitations for developers who would construct the project in exchange for leveraging the busy transit hub’s real-estate value were expected to be released over the weekend.
The Cuomo administration official said the Port Authority’s contribution was tied to an “air train” hub, including to La Guardia Airport. Mr. Cuomo has proposed such a rail link to the Queens airport, which isn’t accessible by train.

Another $75 million is expected from federal transportation grants, specifically those intended to improve air quality and infrastructure resiliency, the Cuomo official said.

A federal transportation official said it wasn’t immediately clear which already-awarded grants New York officials could potentially tap for the project.

The Cuomo administration official said Amtrak is expected to contribute $100 million in capital, but said a final agreement for that amount hadn’t been reached.

An Amtrak spokesman said the passenger railroad is still negotiating the terms for occupying the Moynihan train hall.

Once developers respond to a request for proposals, he said Amtrak would have “a better sense of what—if any—additional funds may be necessary to complete the project.”

NJ.com – Editorial:  Penn Station is a crucial project, which benefits New Jersey
January 12, 2016

The architectural historian Vincent Scully famously compared the granite monolith known as New York's Penn Station with the squalid dungeon that replaced it below 7th and 8th Avenues like this:

"One used to enter the city like a god," he said, referring to the majestic depot razed in 1963. "Now, one scuttles in like a rat."

So with gratitude and appreciation, we welcome the plan to rebuild Penn Station and turn Manhattan's West Side into a hospitable environment once again, and we applaud Gov. Andrew Cuomo's ambitious plans to remake much of this region's transportation network – if only because it's refreshing to see a state preparing boldly and audaciously for its commuter rail demands into the next century.

This is not a project built on whimsy; it is not a quixotic venture designed to benefit the few. This project is critical to the future of this country, to the national economy, to the regional transportation network, and to the quality of life in the most important market in the world.

And this $3 billion makeover of Penn Station has enormous impact on our state, obviously, given that roughly 40 percent of its intercity commuters use New Jersey Transit trains – an average of 160,000 riders per day, coming or going.

This region cannot grow without renovating our mass transit system, and at the heart of the system is busiest station in the hemisphere – a hub that serves more people every day than the three major airports combined, and one that can expect to double its traffic in the next 15 years.

Penn is the nexus for the entire Northeast Corridor. Indeed, the Gateway Tunnel project is the most crucial element to the network – not only because we haven't built a rail tunnel in 100 years, but because it is literally the gateway to this hub. But a new Penn Station must be built.

There's only one problem we foresee: Here in the early so-called RFP stage of the proceedings – when they solicit proposals from developers – New Jersey doesn't seem to have a prominent seat at the table.

This entity calling the shots – comprised of Amtrak, the MTA (which owns the LIRR), and the Empire State Development Corporation – curiously omits New Jersey Transit. In fact, NJT has yet to even comment about Cuomo's magnum opus.

Some smart people such as Martin Robins, who ran the Rutgers-Voorhees Transportation Center, believes that marginalizes New Jersey: "Every aspect of the riding experience – places to sit, where to purchase tickets, concessions – must be taken into account, and New Jersey seems to be left out of that process," he says. "New Jersey Transit contributes five times more usage than Amtrak, yet Amtrak is standing in for New Jersey. How is our interest going to be served?"

Amtrak chairman Tony Coscia, whose company owns Penn Station, replies, "As the project evolves, New Jersey should have a role in the planning of and improvements to Penn Station, as the facility's most meaningful tenant."

One thing that would assure that participation is having a more engaged governor. Either way, a redesigned Penn improves the lives of New Jersey commuters and New Jersey's economy. And we're grateful that at least one area governor recognizes those benefits.

Plan Philly - FRA presents expensive, alternative futures for Amtrak's Northeast Corridor
January 12, 2016
Jim Saksa

Long train rides have an almost magical ability to free the rider’s thoughts from quotidian concerns, to let one’s mind wander unworried with the primary task at hand, arrival at some predetermined destination, and flirt with lofty ideals.

Such flights of fancy—so rarely enjoyed on actual flights—are why Amtrak created its Residency program, which sends writers on long train trips, free of charge (that, and it's effective marketing). The Economist recently took a trip through the snowy forests of the Russian psyche via the Moscow-Archangel line, writing how trains “rumble through Russian literature and poetry with remarkable frequency.”

At SEPTA’s headquarters on Monday night, officials from the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) listened to public feedback on their draft Tier 1 Environmental Impact Study (EIS), a planning document providing three alternative visions for the future of Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor (NEC).

From the crowd’s statements last night, it sounds like the FRA may have spent a little too much time on trains, dreaming big dreams for the Northeast Corridor’s future.

“[The EIS alternatives are] great in the land of infinite money, and if you let me know how to get there, I’ll emigrate at the first opportunity” said Michael Noda, who writes the transit blog, sictransitphiladelphia.org, “but, in the meantime, we live here.”

“Our resources are finite.”

This draft Tier 1 EIS is the latest study in a series called NEC Future. FRA program manager for NEC Future Rebecca Reyes-Alicea told PlanPhilly that, based on feedback from the public and other key stakeholders, a preferred alternative based on the three presented would be announced later this year.

Costs for the three alternatives presented in the EIS range from $64 billion to $308 billion, spent between now and 2040. Only the most expensive alternative, dubbed “Transform” and costing somewhere between $267-$308 billion, would provide for full high speed rail (HSR) along the entirety of the Northeast Corridor’s 457 miles, which would reduce travel times between Boston and Washington DC by nearly three hours.

Alternative 2, or “Grow”, would cut that same trip by about an hour; it would cost around $130 billion.

For a skant $65 billion, Alternative 1 would fix—or “Maintain”—enough of the Corridor’s chokepoints and other glaring problems, like century-old bridges. Just by bringing the system into a state of good repair would reduce the DC-Boston trip by an estimated 35 minutes.

An obligatory “no action alternative” is also included in the EIS, warning about the impending system failures if the Corridor’s infrastructure isn’t at the very least rehabilitated. Even that plan would cost a few billion.

Prominent transportation writer Alon Levy railed against the EIS estimates in a post titled, “When There’s Nothing Left To Burn, You Have To Set Money On Fire” writing that the billions  “that NEC Future wants to burn on HSR could build nearly a complete national HSR network, serving most metro areas above 1 million people.”

Levy focused on what he considered overly expensive and unnecessary elements in the alternatives.

Locally, Levy pointed to a tunnel underneath sections of Philadelphia in Alternatives 2 and 3. Both visions call for a new intercity rail station Philadelphia International Airport, and Alternative 3 puts a new station at Market East, meaning high speed trains would bypass 30th Street Station, which is itself the focus of extremely ambitious and expensive plans right now.

For comparison, a new subway tunnel being built in Manhattan has cost about $2.7 billion per mile. Extending the Broad Street Line about a mile to the Navy Yard is estimated around $500 million.

The NEC Future project is about creating a “a collective, regional vision” for the Northeast Corridor, said Reyes-Alicea, not a concrete set of plans. “It's important to remember that NEC Future is a program of projects, that will be incrementally implemented to achieve whatever vision is selected.”

While $300 billion sounds extreme, the costs will really be spread out across the eight states and District of Columbia over a period exceeding twenty years. That works out to about $12-15 billion a year in construction costs for Alternative 3 and around $6-7 billion a year for Alternative 2.

Currently, Amtrak’s annual federal subsidy is $1.375 billion, an amount free-market conservatives hope to reduce to zero. While Amtrak’s subsidies are significantly smaller than federal highway subsidies, and the economic health of the Northeast arguably relies heavily on the Northeast Corridor, any plan that relies on a five-to-ten-fold increase in federal rail infrastructure spending seems untethered to the realities of government transportation spending.

Lagniappe Weekly (AL) - Amtrak releases study on return of passenger rail service
January 13, 2016
Dale Liesch

A study prepared by Amtrak shows a number of scenarios in which the Southern Rail Commission could be heading down the right track in bringing passenger rail back to Mobile and the Gulf Coast.

At the behest of the multistate commission, Amtrak studied ridership estimates and the cost effectiveness of five options that would link New Orleans to Orlando for the first time since service of the Sunset Limited was suspended just before the landfall of Hurricane Katrina in August 2005. The study’s findings were first discussed during an executive session of the SRC’s November meeting held in Mobile, but the results were made public late last month.

Amtrak determined a simple extension of the City of New Orleans line to Orlando would result in the greatest number of riders of all options, generating annual ridership of 153,900, but would include a funding commitment of nearly $10 million. An alternate line extension, providing daily round-trip service from Mobile to New Orleans, would cost almost half that at $5.5 million, but would only attract ridership of 138,300.

Another group of alternatives would include two daily round trips from New Orleans to Mobile, attracting a ridership of 38,400 annually and costing more than $6 million. It could include a bus to complete the line from Mobile to Jacksonville, but adding that option would raise the cost to $8 million, while attracting slightly more riders at 43,400.

A third set of options would consist of only one long distance round trip from New Orleans to Orlando. It would generate an annual ridership of 69,100 passengers and cost around $14.4 million.

All of the options would require funding from local and federal sources, SRC Chairman Greg White said. There would also be opportunities for private investment.
“A long distance train could include private and public funding,” SRC Chairman Greg White said. “A daily round trip train between New Orleans and Mobile would need to be funded locally.”

The funding, in any case, could come from three or four states, including Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and Florida, White said.

One concern with the re-establishment of rail along the Gulf Coast is the spotty record of timely performance for the Sunset Limited. Although daily train service along the Gulf Coast began with the Gulf Coast Limited in 1984, the Sunset Limited extended the line from Los Angeles to Miami in 1993.

“While the Sunset Limited was initially a success, as the years went on the train suffered from significant operating and timekeeping problems which were a product of more general operating problems experienced by the host railroads,” the report states. “While the host railroad operating problems were beyond Amtrak’s control, the 2,764-mile length of the Sunset Limited route greatly magnified the impacts to service.”

Trains frequently ran several hours late and in some cases, the report points out, were as much as 24 hours behind schedule.

“Amtrak made several adjustments in an attempt to address the delays, including adding more time to the schedule, but to no avail,” the report states. “By 2005, Amtrak was busing passengers east of New Orleans on nearly one-third of all trips in an effort to keep the Sunset Limited on schedule over the rest of its route.”

The drag the schedule had on ridership was felt as the number of riders dwindled each year of its service. According to the report, ridership for 1993 was 148,387. Ridership increased to a total of 174,927 the next year, but fell each of the following years, down to 97,366 in 2002. The line saw an increase to 105,033 in 2003 before falling again to an all-time low of 81,348 in 2005, its final year.

“The Sunset Limited service was suspended in August of 2005, immediately prior to Hurricane Katrina making landfall along the Louisiana-Mississippi border,” the report states. “Due to the significant damage to the region, (CSX) railroad service was also suspended. Following the restoration of the (CSX) mainline in the spring of 2006, Amtrak did not restore the previous service east of New Orleans.”

Amtrak spokesman Marc Magliari admits the poor on-time performance had an impact on ridership for the cross-country train. He said reliability is the “single biggest determinant of passenger satisfaction,” but suggested changes have been made to greatly improve the on-time performance of a future Gulf Coast line.

For instance, since 2005 CSX has rebuilt much of the route and it now is a lot shorter, meaning delays will not have as big an impact as they once did.

Magliari said Amtrak is generally in favor of more service in more areas, but the individual communities and states would have the most significant say in whether a project moves forward. For instance, he said, local communities would pick where any new stations would be and Amtrak would then negotiate with freight companies for the right to lease track.

Magliari said there is demand all over the country for alternatives to Interstate driving and as a result, Amtrak has broken ridership records nine of the last 11 years.

With the study completed and mayors of many Gulf Coast cities initially on board, White said the next step is a test run of a proposed route to give local stakeholders and elected officials a feel for it.

At the SRC’s meeting in Mobile last month, several elected officials expressed support for the proposal, while others were more reluctant to get on board. Mobile Mayor Sandy Stimpson called the idea “preliminary,” while Congressman Bradley Byrne remained skeptical about federal funding opportunities.

STATE BY STATE
Home
CT Post - Rail hearing draws disparate voices
January 13, 2016
Bill Cummings

HARTFORD — Federal rail regulators on Wednesday received a preview of the competing interests they will face if a multibillion-dollar plan to upgrade the state’s commuter rail system moves forward.

Trail and bike enthusiasts urged the Federal Rail Administration to build greenways and bike and hiking paths along new commuter lines and to create similar lanes along Metro-North’s existing system.

Small town officials worried that proposed new rail lines — from Danbury to Boston or New Haven to Rhode Island — would uproot their communities.

And some doubted expanding that Metro-North by adding two sets of tracks for high-speed trains is possible.

“There will have to a lot of compromise and give and take,” said David Chase, a retired transportation engineer.

“Two more tracks through Fairfield County, I’m not even sure that is practical,” Chase said. “You have I-95 and development along those tracks.”
A public hearing conducted by the FRA drew about 60 people, ranging from University of Connecticut students eager for train service to the Storrs campus to “Rail and Trail” advocates and small town officials. The hearing is one of 11 being held across the Northeast Corridor on an ambitious plan to revamp rail service from Washington, D.C., to Boston.

The FRA has proposed three investment options, ranging from about $20 billion to shore up the aging system to $300 billion to close chokeholds and build new lines, including tracks through Danbury and Waterbury and linking New Haven, Hartford and Providence.

Press Republican (NY) - Railroad inspections find minor issues
January 13, 2016
Lohr McKinstry

WILLSBORO — Five minor track defects were found between Willsboro and Whitehall in the latest round of statewide railroad track and oil car inspections.

Inspection teams from the State Department of Transportation and the Federal Railroad Administration carried out the evaluations at the CSX Corporation-owned Selkirk Yard and Frontier Rail Yard in Buffalo and at the Canadian Pacific-owned Kenwood Yard in Albany.

The inspectors also examined Canadian Pacific Railway mainline track between Whitehall and Willsboro and between Willsboro and the Canadian border.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the latest round of targeted crude-oil tank car and rail inspections was intended to improve public safety and reduce potential dangers associated with the transport of crude oil across the state.

Inspection teams examined 756 crude-oil tank cars, 239 miles of track and 51 switches, a press release said.
And overall, state and federal teams uncovered and addressed three critical defects and 66 non-critical defects.

"By holding crude-oil transporters to the highest standard in New York, we are making the public safety our number one priority and reducing the potential for deadly accidents," Cuomo said in a statement. 

"We will continue to work with our federal partners to ensure that any and all defects are repaired immediately and that New York’s rail systems remain the safest in the nation."

Canadian Pacific Mainline (Whitehall to Willsboro): Department of Transportation track inspectors examined 63 miles of track and three switches along the mainline between Whitehall and Willsboro and found five non-critical defects. 

They included loose clip and guard bolts and failing to properly locate/maintain emergency notification signs at crossings.

Canadian Pacific Mainline (Willsboro to Canadian Border): Federal Railroad Administration track inspectors checked about 53 miles of track and six switches along the mainline between Willsboro and the Canadian border.

No defects were found.

During the inspections, two types of defects are identified — critical and non-critical. Critical defects identify important maintenance issues that must be addressed immediately but do not necessarily indicate safety lapses.

Non-critical rail defects must be repaired within 30 days.

Following a series of out-of-state disasters involving the transport of crude oil by rail, New York state has taken a series of aggressive actions to improve the safety and reliability of the practice, the governor said.

Associated Press - The shining: UK commuters told trains delayed by sunlight
January 12, 2016

LONDON (AP) — It's the dark days of one of the rainiest British winters on record. So some London commuters were surprised to hear their trains had been delayed because of the sun.

Rail operator Southeastern tweeted Tuesday that "we had severe congestion through Lewisham due to dispatching issues as a result of strong sunlight." The company said low winter sun was hitting monitors at an angle that meant the drivers could not see them.

Almost 1 million people travel to London by train every weekday — and commuters are used to hearing a wide array of excuses for the frequent delays.

Past culprits have included "leaves on the line" and "the wrong type of snow."

Whitefish Pilot - Rail safety focus of roundtable
January 12, 2016
Heidi Desch

The Montana Public Service Commission will hold a roundtable discussion on Jan. 20 in Helena on improving railroad safety in Montana. 

The commission is responsible for the supervision of railroads in partnership with the Federal Railroad Administration.

The rountable comes after an audit determined that the state’s oversight of railroad safety falls short when everyday crude oil train traffic from the Bakken region is passing through Montana.

According to the report, U.S. crude oil production has risen sharply in recent years, with shipments across Montana increasing by up to five trains per week. At full capacity, that could increase crude oil shipments up to as many as 40 trains per week across the state, the report notes.

The audit suggested that the commission increase its railroad safety inspection capability by adding inspectors. The commission is looking at possibilities for addressing this in the 2017 Legislature. There are only two inspectors in the state.

The report also noted that the absence of statewide emergency planning is leading to weaknesses in local emergency planning. The report said there is a lack of hazardous materials response capability in a large portion of the state where first responders are properly trained to respond to hazardous materials incidents.

The audit recommends the Public Service Commission conduct a rail safety risk assessment and develop a state rail safety plan.

Stakeholders have been invited to attend the meeting which will focus on a variety of topics, including conduction a rail safety risk assessment; establishing rail safety goals and objectives; developing a rail safety plan for Montana reviewed with the Federal Railroad Administration; engage with Montana Disaster and Emergency Services, engage in emergency planning to ensure the rail safety program is proactively addressing risk in the state; and conduct rulemaking on local safety concerns of blocked railroad crossings.

3


