 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 25, 2016
TV & RADIO
Metro-North now part of FRA's Confidential Close Call Reporting System	2
Man and child dead after car is struck by train	2
Traffic signals could have prevented car vs train accident that claimed five in Iberia Parish, LA	2
Vermont legislator talks Amtrak to oil trains on CBS	2
Man's leg partially amputated as he trespassed on NS rail yard	3
Portland emergency responders not prepared for major crude oil derailment	3
U.S. Senator Durbin calls on FRA to establish new, stricter rules for crude oil trains	3
U.S. Senator Durbin says there is proof RR's not complying with safety rules	3
Quiet Zone project underway in El Paso	3
Snow plow gets plowed by Metro-North train	3
New signs at fatal railroad crossing	3
Man in hospital after driving around gates at railroad crossing and getting struck by a train	3
NATIONAL NEWS
New Rochelle Daily News (NY) - Lowey Applauds Federal Enforcement of Rail Safety Rules	3
PTC
Chicago Tribune - Some Metra trains to be running new safety technology by end of year	4
Fortune (NY) - Railroad Association Denies Smart Train Cyber Vulnerabilities	5
Boston Review - Technology Derailed	7
RAIL INCIDENTS
Journal News (OH) - Pedestrian struck by a train in Middletown	10
KPLC 7 (LA) - Male driver in hospital after colliding with train in Lake Charles	11
Union Bulletin (WA) - Train derails south of Walla Walla	11
Ventura Star (CA) - Officials: Fatal crash shows danger of walking on train tracks	12
Associated Press - No one injured in 10-car train derailment in Lincoln	13
ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
TC Palm (FL) – Editorial: Thumb up: Finally, a federal agency rebuffs All Aboard Florida	14
CROSSING NEWS
The Advocate (LA) - Safety experts: Traffic signaling system might have prevented tragedy at Iberia Parish rail crossing where five were killed	14
Journal News (OH) - South Hamilton Crossing project reaching milestone	18
HIGH SPEED RAIL
LA Times - Bullet train's first segment, reserved for Southland, could open in Bay Area instead	19
AMTRAK
Progressive Railroading - Amtrak's Harrisburg station to undergo improvements	22
STATE BY STATE
Chicago Tribune - Still 'work to do' on railroad safety	23
Chicago Sun Times - Railroads have deep ties to Illinois pols	24
New York Times - In Philadelphia, Batteries on Transit System Power More Than Just the Trains	27



TV & RADIO
Home

Metro-North now part of FRA's Confidential Close Call Reporting System
WTNH-NH (ABC) - Hartford-New 

Man and child dead after car is struck by train
KARK (NBC) - Little Rock, AR

Traffic signals could have prevented car vs train accident that claimed five in Iberia Parish, LA
KATC (ABC) - Lafayette, LA

Vermont legislator talks Amtrak to oil trains on CBS
WCAX-BUR (CBS) - Burlington, VT

Man's leg partially amputated as he trespassed on NS rail yard
KNWA (NBC) - Fort Smith, AR

Portland emergency responders not prepared for major crude oil derailment
News Radio KEX - Portland, OR

U.S. Senator Durbin calls on FRA to establish new, stricter rules for crude oil trains
KMOX-AM (Radio) - St. Louis, MO

U.S. Senator Durbin says there is proof RR's not complying with safety rules
KMOX-AM (Radio) - St. Louis, MO

Quiet Zone project underway in El Paso
KTSM (NBC) - El Paso, TX

Snow plow gets plowed by Metro-North train
WTIC-HFD (FOX) - Hartford-New Haven, CT

New signs at fatal railroad crossing
KSAW (ABC) - Twin Falls, ID

Man in hospital after driving around gates at railroad crossing and getting struck by a train
KPLC (NBC) - Lafayette, LA

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
New Rochelle Daily News (NY) - Lowey Applauds Federal Enforcement of Rail Safety Rules
January 21, 2016
Aaron Miller

WESTCHESTER COUNTY, N.Y.—Congresswoman Nita Lowey applauded the Federal Railroad Administration’s increased enforcement of rail safety rules.

The FRA issued 6,845 violations and $15 million in penalties in the fiscal year ending Sep. 30, up 23 percent from the previous year. Lowey, who represents Rockland County and most of Westchester County, through which both passenger and shipment rail lines run, hailed the announcement.

“Strict safety standards exist for a reason,” Lowey said. “And I’m glad the Federal Railroad Administration is holding railroads accountable for adhering to these regulations.”

Lowey, the Ranking Member of the House Appropriations Committee, particularly pointed to the danger of hazardous materials being shipped through Rockland.

“Tank cars carry highly volatile crude oil through American communities each day, including Rockland County. No one should have to live with dangerous explosive materials rumbling through their back yards,” Lowey said.

Passenger safety is also an issue for Lowey, as both Amtrak and Metro-North run through Westchester. In 2011, Metro-North’s safety came into question when a train coming from Westchester crashed shortly after entering the Bronx, killing four and injuring 61 passengers.

Lowey is a co-sponsor of the Crude-by-Rail Safety Act now in Congress, which would authorize $40 million for first responder training programs, establish grants for local communities to update emergency response plans, and improve emergency notification procedures.

PTC
Home
Chicago Tribune - Some Metra trains to be running new safety technology by end of year
January 25, 2016
Kate Thayer

Metra expects to begin using a new, federally mandated system designed to avoid crashes by the end of the year on its most used line and meet a 2018 congressional deadline on the remainder of its system.

The technology, known as Positive Train Control, uses GPS, radios, computers and antennas to slow or stop speeding trains, prevent collisions and override human errors. Congress ordered PTC be implemented on the nation's railroads after the 2008 collision of a Los Angeles-area commuter train and a freight train. Twenty-five people were killed.

In the wake of another fatal collision, an Amtrak executive urged Congress to mandate the PTC system, calling it the "single greatest contribution my generation of railroaders can make."

Although Congress originally implemented a 2015 deadline, that was extended to 2018 after railroads lobbied and threatened to shut down because they said they could not meet the earlier date.

Metra will begin equipping its Burlington Northern Santa Fe and Union Pacific lines before the rest of the system because the freight lines that share those tracks are responsible for some of the work and ahead of Metra in implementation, spokesman Michael Gillis said.

Metra's share of the work on the BNSF line — the busiest — is expected to be complete this spring, but it must go through testing. If tests go well, PTC will be operational by the end of the year on the BNSF line, Gillis said.

The three Union Pacific lines will go through testing later this year and PTC is expected to begin running on those lines sometime next year, Gillis said. The seven remaining lines will follow, but Metra is committed to meet federal deadlines, he said.

Although a small amount of federal funding is provided specifically for PTC, Gillis said Metra's share will cost $350 million to $400 million to install the equipment and $15 million to $20 million every year to maintain.

Metra plans to use capital funds to pay for the work and last year implemented a 10-year plan for fare increases in part to pay for PTC-operating costs.

The first rate increase went into effect last year and another is scheduled for Feb. 1. The upcoming rate hike will raise $6.5 million in new revenue for the PTC project and other work.

Monthly tickets will increase by a flat $2.50 per month, an increase of 0.9 percent to 2.7 percent, depending on the distance to Chicago. Ten-ride ticket customers will see an increase of $1.75 per month, an increase of 1.9 to 6 percent, depending on the distance of the trip.

And one-way tickets will cost 25 cents more, an increase of 2.4 percent to 7.7 percent, depending on distance.

Reduced fares for special users — senior citizens, customers with disabilities and those on Medicare — were increased $1.25 on monthly fares and 75 cents on 10-ride tickets. There's no increase for special users with one-way fares.

Fortune (NY) - Railroad Association Denies Smart Train Cyber Vulnerabilities
January 22, 2016
David Z. Morris

As trains get wired, security threats loom.

Railroad industry representatives are disputing a recent claim that its network security practices are inadequate.

In the Boston Review last week, writer Bryce Emley argued that the rail industry hasn’t sufficiently opened its systems to independent review, that railways’ IT engineers have been opaque in their dealings with regulators, and that derailments possibly caused by hacking may not have been completely reported or investigated. The claims were largely based on conversations with security researcher and Department of Homeland Security contractor Neil Smith.

Cybersecurity on the rails is increasingly important with the advent of Positive Train Control, a safety system that connects train controls to wireless networks. Successful hackers could theoretically gain control of such systems and cause a derailment similar to last year’s Amtrak disaster or the 2013 explosion of an oil train that killed 47 in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec. The possibility of causing mayhem remotely could make train hacking an attractive priority for terrorists.

But Tom Farmer, assistant vice president for security for the Association of American Railroads, characterized the article as “based on a lot of inaccuracies and mischaracterizations” and emphasized the industry’s commitment of resources to security.

Farmer disputed Smith’s claims that an unspecified derailment in Michigan may have been caused by hacking but that supervisors failed to investigate the theory. “We have not had, in the freight rail industry, a cyber-driven derailment because of compromise of the network,” Farmer said.

For more on rail safety and security, watch:


Smith also told Emley that in at least one case, a network developer working for a railroad cut off communication with the Department of Homeland Security’s Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) in the face of requests to test their network. Emley more broadly characterized a lack of transparency as “the rail industry’s modus operandi.”

Farmer said he was not aware of the incident referenced by Smith, but that AAR and the industry have liaisons and share information with agencies including the FBI, TSA, and ICS-CERT. “We work very hard to sustain communication, and if government has questions or concerns, we don’t shut them off.”

Farmer also said that, contrary to the claims attributed to Smith, the railroads do allow independent security researchers to test PTC networks. “We’ve been involved with a national laboratory that specializes in the protection of industrial control systems for a period of almost five years,” Farmer said, declining to name the laboratory.

Farmer did confirm one of Emley’s assertions—the lack of formal, industrywide network security standards. Each railway, Farmer said, has its own cybersecurity teams and practices, though they share information through a body called the Rail Information Security Committee. That committee has been in place since 1999, which Farmer says shows the industry’s longstanding commitment to security.

Get Data Sheet, Fortune’s technology newsletter.

A federal deadline for PTC implementation by 2016 has now been delayed, after the industry argued that the scale of the task made it impossible to meet the original deadline. New rules give railroads up to five years to complete the upgrades. However, the system is currently implemented in 31% of locomotives owned by AAR members.

“Cybersecurity … is not an area that the railroads are in any way neglecting,” Farmer said. “Quite the opposite.”

Boston Review - Technology Derailed
January 16, 2016
Bryce Emley

Few of us think about cyber security until it fails. Even when it does in a spectacular way—as in the recent theft of nearly 80 million healthcare records from Anthem, contact information from 76 million JPMorgan Chase investors, and 5 million sets of fingerprints from the federal government—we tend not to notice unless the consequences are both direct and dramatic. (Think of the would-be adulterers outed by the Ashley Madison hackers.) This benefits not only the perpetrators, but also their corporate victims, who often opt to deal discreetly, or not at all, with their vulnerabilities.

Among the less glamorous targets of hacking are American railways. But nearly 40 percent of U.S. freight is transported by rail—vastly more than any other mode of transportation. It is efficient and also one of the safest ways to move heavy loads, thanks in part to the 2008 Rail Safety Improvement Act (RSIA), which required all rail companies to overhaul their safety regulations by the end of 2015. One of the act’s requirements is that all rail companies adopt positive train control (PTC), a series of installations and enhancements that allows trains to be operated and monitored remotely via wireless network.

If PTC mitigates potential human errors (speeding through turns, falling asleep in transit, failing to lock brakes), it also creates new dangers­ by opening up avenues to hackers—vulnerabilities shared by all Web-enabled electronics, payment methods, and vehicles. Neil Smith, a San Francisco–based independent security researcher who has been working with the U.S. Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) since 2012 to assess railway network vulnerabilities, says that the chances of a breach are dangerously high.

In 2008 a teenager in Lodz, Poland, hacked his town’s rail network with only a TV remote and a library computer, taking control of nearby trains and causing multiple derailments. And just because we haven’t heard of serious train hacking in the United States doesn’t mean it hasn’t happened. The watchdog website Nextgov obtained a summary of a Transportation Security Administration (TSA) meeting in which government officials admitted that hackers had “disrupted the railway signals” of an unnamed northwestern rail company on two occasions in December 2011. Industry representatives quickly dismissed the memo as inaccurate.

Despite increasing confidence that railways are being hacked, researchers’ hands are tied without the permission of rail companies.
This seems to be the rail industry’s modus operandi. Because vulnerabilities make for bad PR and potentially cost a lot of money to fix, it is best to avoid disclosing the sources of accidents. In 2012 Smith, also an avid ham radio hobbyist, noticed an antenna on a passing BNSF Railway train while he was waiting at a rail crossing and decided on a whim to record the train’s telemetry data. Stricken by how easy it was for him to access the train’s automated status and control signals, he reported suspicions of network vulnerabilities to ICS-CERT. Until that point, few—if any—professionals in the industry had publicly suggested that cyber attacks on trains were possible. When ICS-CERT consulted with the train’s network developer in hopes of getting Smith the green light to run more definitive tests, they responded cryptically, then shut down communication with both Smith and ICS-CERT.

Smith heard nothing else about his data until 2014. Within a few months of the massive derailment in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec, which killed dozens and leveled several city blocks, a TSA-Surface inspector found Smith’s report and emailed him about a similar derailment in Michigan. To him, Smith’s research suggested that it was possible that someone had hacked this train’s network, but the theory ultimately lost traction once it moved up to the regional supervisor. Smith heard nothing more about it and was never able to find public reportage on the derailment, noting that the TSA-Surface inspector and his team likely had too little expertise with cyber issues to pursue it further.

According to Smith, though he and other researchers are increasingly confident that North American railways are being hacked, their hands are tied. “Without the manufacturers and rail companies becoming involved,” Smith explains, “we can’t do live tests to be 100 percent sure that something is a ‘for sure’ vulnerability. I can run simulations all day long that back up all of my suspicions, but it’s not like I can walk over to a train track and test it out—that would be a literal act of terrorism.”

Because network vulnerabilities are hard to anticipate, some companies that offer security products—electronics manufacturers and online shopping platforms, for example—hire security research companies such as Rapid7 or Synack to pry into their systems in order to identify holes and advise on how to patch them before they can be exploited. This practice only makes rail companies’ resistance to independent vulnerability testing more disconcerting: it is reasonable for a company with a product so dependent on wireless access to pursue independent testing, all the more so given the industry’s incredibly complex overhaul of systems and protocol over a short span of time and its newness to network security. As a result, Smith adds, rail companies are rarely equipped with necessary defenses because there were no industry-wide, industry-specific security standards to guide their network developers when the RSIA was passed: “The developers woke up and got a memo saying, ‘You need to have X, Y, and Z done by December 31, 2015,’ and so they addressed X, Y, and Z, meanwhile leaving off the other twenty-three characters in the alphabet.”

The other problem is that the technology the rail industry relies on is created by a company owned by Class 1 railroads—those that earn at least $433.2 million, accounting for nearly 70 percent of U.S. freighting in terms of mileage. The U.S. freight rail network as a whole is a $60 billion private industry, heavily invested in its shareholders, customers, and profits. This, Smith believes, is likely why companies don’t want to work with independent researchers or even the Department of Homeland Security: “If these companies agree to investigate their own networks, they’re admitting that there could be vulnerabilities that would require huge amounts of money to overhaul. That could hurt sales and stock prices and scare off their shareholders.” From a financial standpoint, there’s no incentive to rock the boat by admitting to potential security failings, and so publicity and reliable media coverage of railway vulnerabilities are fairly hard to find in America.

As long as companies value our security according to cost and optics, the technologies that facilitate modern life will present untold liabilities. 
What media coverage does exist often comes in the form of conspiracy theory and niche websites. (An exception was Newsweek’s 2015 article “The Future of Hacking: Your Planes, Trains and Automobiles Aren’t Safe.”) By contrast reporting on theories and predictions about railway cyber security in Europe is much easier to find, spanning major publications and organizations ranging from the BBC to the UK’s Financial Times to the RT news outlet. Additionally there seems to be increasing attention to rail security in European cyber security conferences, including a recent panel at the Chaos Communication Congress in Hamburg (covered in Popular Science) and Industrial Control Cyber Security Europe, which is affiliated with the Rail Cyber Security Summit held in London this March. Rod Diridon, Sr., emeritus executive director of the Mineta Transportation Institute, attributes the difference in media treatment to the fact that “most European countries are somewhat socialistic, and their railways are owned by the government and not publicly traded.”

Indeed the U.S. government has little control over the security practices of private rail companies; still one might expect government-funded passenger lines such as Amtrak to be in complete compliance with RSIA. But just weeks before the major Amtrak derailment outside of Philadelphia in May last year, Congress moved to delay mandatory installation of PTC by five years. The derailed train was not equipped with PTC, and officials at the National Transportation Safety Board explicitly stated that the mandated autocontrol technology would have prevented the disaster entirely. Amtrak posted an official blog post days later, noting, “Amtrak leads all other large railroads (Class 1) in the railroad industry in the installation of PTC systems, having spent $110.7 million dollars since 2008 to install PTC.” Though only “certain segments of the American rail network” fall under that mandate, Philadelphia’s Northeast Corridor is one of them.

Even though PTC has troubling faults, it is a strong step forward in railway safety. Establishing safer railways isn’t a matter of getting rid of it, but of making a concerted national effort to test and secure it. But the intersection of government regulation and private business in the rail industry is complex. The federal testing facility responsible for assessing PTC integration, Technology Transportation Center, Inc., is owned by the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) but operated by the American Association of Railroads (AAR). “Even though the FRA is doing the testing,” Smith explains, “ultimately it’s up to the AAR to decide what gets tested. With the amount of power they have, it’s like we’re still dealing with the train barons of the 1800s.”

The private companies responsible for making improvements to their networks are also the ones who get to decide whether they need to make changes, and when and whether to engage third-party security experts. Of course, they already have IT teams working to keep their networks secure, but, according to Smith, these efforts have been perilously fragmented during the hasty scramble for compliance; the seven Class 1 train companies’ developers are isolated from each other, from PTC developers, and from third-party security companies. “So you’ve got separate teams across many different rail companies, integrators, and contractors who, if they were just one cohesive unit, might have resolved many security issues,” Smith explains. “But since each one has their own legal teams, PR execs, etc., they don’t want to report that something is wrong if it might mean making them or their business partners look bad.”

Given how new and tenuous PTC is, it seems foolhardy to dismiss independent researchers who have identified existing weaknesses. Certainly there is a lot at stake: one derailment can cost a rail company millions of dollars, so it would seem that protecting their networks is in their best interest. But since RSIA was passed, these companies have invested billions of dollars collectively in compliance upgrades and are now looking at the prospect of investing billions more to fix it. If avoiding that investment means overlooking a theoretical hacking vulnerability that hasn’t proven to do any damage so far, then, at least for a few more years, they seem more than willing to take their chances.

In October Congress voted to push back the RSIA deadline to 2018. In the interim, there may be two possible solutions: either the FRA takes back control of its testing facilities and runs unbiased testing to shape further legislation, or Congress pressures these companies to pursue independent analysis and testing beyond their own internal testing, which so far has proven insufficient. If independent researchers such as Smith can still see the holes they have left in their defenses, then independent testing needs to be a central component of their security protocol, no matter what the cost.

As long as for-profit companies calculate the value of our security according to cost and PR optics, the technologies that facilitate modern life will present untold liabilities. A profit-motivated company has little to gain from transparency if it may alarm investors and consumers and require greater investment with no promise of return. To see the business is to alter it, and publicly traded companies prefer not to open themselves to independent scrutiny, even if doing so would make us safer.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Journal News (OH) - Pedestrian struck by a train in Middletown
January 25, 2016
Rick Mccrabb
A Middletown man was transported to Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton after he was struck by a train around 1:20 pm Friday near First Avenue and University Boulevard intersection.

Garner Wayne Stephens, 47, was first taken by Middletown paramedics to Atrium Medical Center, then transferred to Miami Valley, said Maj. Mark Hoffman of the Middletown Division of Police.
His condition and injuries are unknown. He wasn’t listed as a patient on the roster of either hospital, according to officials.

Hoffman said the initial investigation shows that Stephens waited for a northbound train to cross the intersection. Then, he walked across the railroad tracks and was struck by a southbound train.

The conductors of both trains told police they were blowing their horns and yelling at the man as they approached. Hoffman said alcohol is believed to be a factor in the accident. Stephens was convicted of OVI in 1997 and 2001, according to Butler County Area Courts records.
Minutes after the accident was reported, a Norfolk Southern train was stopped on the tracks near Woodlawn Avenue outside of Cohen Brothers Inc. with a single police cruiser parked by its engine.

The stopped train stretched from Woodlawn to just past Reinartz Boulevard, blocking intersections along the way. The crossing gates all remained down as well.
Hoffman said pedestrians and motorists never can be “too safe” when crossing railroad tracks. He said people should wait until the crossing guard is lifted before crossing the tracks.

There were 782 fatal train accidents involving pedestrians in the U.S. in 2015, according to the Federal Railroad Administration Office. Of those, 32 occurred in Ohio, the sixth most in the country.

KPLC 7 (LA) - Male driver in hospital after colliding with train in Lake Charles
January 24, 2016
Liz Koh

A driver is receiving medical attention at a local hospital after his vehicle collided with a train Sunday evening.

According to Lake Charles Police spokesman Mark Kraus, investigators believe a man was driving southbound when he drove around the arms, at the railroad crossing at Ryan Street and Railroad Avenue, and collided with a train.

The accident happened around 6:15 p.m., near the Lake Charles Amtrak station.

The driver was taken to a nearby hospital.

Kraus said the driver was the only person in the vehicle and he is identified as a white male.

Currently, railroad crossings from Ryan to Kirkman streets are blocked due to the accident.

The investigation is ongoing.

Union Bulletin (WA) - Train derails south of Walla Walla
January 22, 2016
Michael Lopez

Heavy equipment was brought in Thursday to move freight cars that derailed sometime after 5 p.m. Wednesday on a section of railroad line about 1/2 mile north of Stateline Road.

No injuries were reported. 

The Palouse River and Coulee City Railroad, owned by Kansas-based Watco Companies, operates on the private rail line. 

Attempts to contact railroad officials Thursday and today to provide information were unsuccessful. 

Local emergency services authorities said the derailment was not reported to them. It was unknown what the cars were carrying, if anything, and what caused the derailment. 

A spokesman for the Federal Railroad Administration said today the agency was looking into the incident and is still seeking information.

Ventura Star (CA) - Officials: Fatal crash shows danger of walking on train tracks
January 23, 2016
Cindy Von Quedow

Officials are again warning Ventura County residents about the dangers of walking on or near train tracks after the practice cost an 18-year-old Oxnard man his life Monday.

Lisandro Licea was walking north in the middle of the tracks with a bicycle when he was struck by a northbound train at 3 a.m. Monday, Union Pacific officials said. The incident occurred on the train bridge near the Santa Clara River between Ventura and Oxnard.

The 76-car oil train used its emergency horn and brakes but could not stop in time to avoid a crash, officials said.

The Ventura County Medical Examiner's Office said Licea died of blunt-force trauma and ruled the death was an accident, not suicide.

Ventura County sheriff's Capt. John Reilly said his agency was investigating the crash and there was no evidence to indicate it was anything other than an accident. He said it's difficult to determine if Licea was distracted at all before the crash.

It does not appear that people use the bridge frequently to get across the Santa Clara River, but doing so is dangerous, Reilly said.

"We recommend people stay off the tracks," Reilly said. "Nothing good can come from being on train tracks."

The United States had 269 highway-rail grade crossing fatalities in 2014, according to the Federal Railroad Administration. California had the more than any other state, 33.

Ventura County Fire Department Capt. Mike Lindbery said that bridge is not designed for pedestrians.

"I don't ever recommend walking on a train trestle for a short cut, because it's not worth losing your life over," he said

He said that with the modernization of trains, sometimes people can't hear them coming. Wearing ear buds or earphones near tracks is an especially bad idea.

Francisco Castillo Jr., area director of corporate relations and media for Union Pacific, called Monday's crash an "unfortunate situation that could have been avoided."

"Our thoughts and prayers go to the family and friends of the victim," he said.

Castillo said Union Pacific works with the nonprofit group Operation Life Saver to educate the community on taking precautions near railroad tracks. According to Operation Lifesaver, a person or vehicle is hit by a train about every three hours.

The group says it has helped reduce the number of train and vehicle crashes from a 1972 high of about 12,000 to about 2,286 in 2014.

Castillo said train engineers and conductors are required to blow the horn when they see someone on or near tracks, as they did Monday. But it was dark, and by the time they saw Licea, it was too late to avoid hitting him, Castillo said.

He said the rail company works with law enforcement to determine exactly what happened. Typically footage is reviewed and tracks and the locomotive are checked.

"In general, we're proud of the fact that the number of cases Union Pacific has seen has decreased in the last 10 years, but we have a lot of work to do," Castillo said.

Associated Press - No one injured in 10-car train derailment in Lincoln
January 23, 2016

LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) — No one was injured when 10 train cars went off the tracks in the BNSF railyard near Cornhusker Highway in Lincoln.

The Lincoln Journal Star reports (http://bit.ly/1PLhaIy ) the derailment happened just after midnight Thursday.

BNSF spokesman Andy Williams says the cars were full of grain and were being moved when they went off the tracks. They did not tip over.

Crew worked hours to put the cars back on the tracks, and a portion of 70th Street from Cornhusker Highway to Custer Street was closed until about 10 a.m. Friday.

The derailment is under investigation.

ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
Home
TC Palm (FL) – Editorial: Thumb up: Finally, a federal agency rebuffs All Aboard Florida
January 21, 2016

SURPRISE, SURPRISE!: It's refreshing to see a federal agency push back against All Aboard Florida.

Whether it's the Federal Railroad Administration issuing innocuous environmental impact statements or the U.S. Department of Transportation granting All Aboard Florida two extensions to sell $1.75 billion in tax-exempt bonds, federal officials appeared to be doing their utmost to facilitate the Miami-to-Orlando passenger rail project.

So it was a pleasant surprise to learn the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, in a Jan. 7 letter to All Aboard Florida, expressed its reluctance to approve permits for the northern section of the project.

Corps officials said they need more information about potential damage to federal waters, including wetlands, before allowing All Aboard Florida to begin work in Indian River and Brevard counties.

"You are cautioned that commencement of the proposed work in waters of the United States subject to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdiction, prior to authorization, would constitute a violation of federal laws and subject you to possible enforcement action," the Corps stated in the letter.

It's reassuring to see the rail project get much-needed federal scrutiny.

CROSSING NEWS
Home
The Advocate (LA) - Safety experts: Traffic signaling system might have prevented tragedy at Iberia Parish rail crossing where five were killed
January 23, 2016
Lanie Lee Cook

NEW IBERIA — Railroad safety experts consider the layout of the La. 88 railroad crossing, where five people died from a crash in December, one of the most dangerous because it’s less than two car-lengths from a highway intersection, leading to traffic backups that can trap a vehicle in the path of an oncoming train.

But although the crossing’s layout and accident history would appear to qualify it for safety upgrades state transportation officials say are planned elsewhere in Iberia Parish, none are in the works to address the problems at the La. 88 crossing — even though there’s been at least one crash a year there since 2012 involving a vehicle stopped on the tracks.

The trap is something 70-year-old Phyllis Leblanc faced on Dec. 22, as she and her husband, her twin 12-year-old grandsons and their two friends traveled home to New Iberia in the middle of an evening thunderstorm, according to witness accounts told to Leblanc’s family members. One of those accounts came from an off-duty first responder in the line of traffic who witnessed the crash.

State Police confirmed Leblanc was stopped on the tracks when an Amtrak passenger train crashed into her vehicle. Leblanc and the two friends died at the scene, while her husband and one of her grandsons died later at a hospital.

Although police won’t confirm further circumstances surrounding the crash until a completed investigative report is released, witnesses told Leblanc’s family that vehicles were in front of and behind the woman’s Ford Taurus before the crash, all waiting to turn on to La. 182 from La. 88.

Not every scenario ends in tragedy, but it’s common at Iberia Parish railroad crossings for traffic to back up over the tracks, said Parish Councilman Tom Landry, whose District 3 includes the La. 88 crossing and two others along La. 182 he said are particularly problematic.

At the intersection of La. 182 and Airport Boulevard, which feeds traffic from the Acadiana Regional Airport, tractor-trailers often have no choice but to stop on the tracks while waiting to turn onto the highway. A few miles south, at La. 3212, the railroad crossing is near not only the highway intersection but a third road that leads into the city limits.

These are only a few of about 1,300 more crossings statewide with similar configurations, according to the Department of Transportation and Development.

Landry said the aged designs in Iberia Parish are flawed when paired with today’s traffic volume.

“Those three intersections are problematic, and I’m not sure what we can do,” Landry said.

Some railroad safety experts say one measure that could have prevented the tragedy is a traffic signal at La. 182 and La. 88 linked by sensors to approaching trains. The sensors would trigger the light to turn green as the crossing guard lowers, allowing any vehicle in front of a car stopped on the track to move forward and out of the way.

But other experts say there are no simple solutions.

Heavy traffic
An estimated 6,100 vehicles pass over the La. 88 crossing daily, and somewhere between 12,000 and 14,000 vehicles travel daily past the intersection on La. 182, according to DOTD figures.

Fourteen trains — seven during the day and seven at night — cross the intersection each day, according to Federal Railroad Administration crossing inventory forms, which collect traffic and safety information about railroad crossings around the country.

The average speed of trains at the crossing is 70 mph, according to the documents. Freight trains can travel up to 60 mph, and the speed limit for Amtrak trains is 80 mph.

Drivers who find themselves stopped on the tracks have little time to react. According to Federal Railroad Administration rules, the gates are activated and trains are required to sound horns 15 to 20 seconds from approaching a crossing.

Railroads are required to periodically submit updates on the forms they are required to submit to the federal agency with traffic and safety information. They detail information about each crossing’s traffic volume and safety features so regulators can identify accident trends around the U.S. and determine safety initiatives moving forward, an Federal Railroad Administration spokesman said.

But whether that information is reliable is questionable.

Both state- and railroad-submitted versions of the forms began misreporting more than a decade ago whether the La. 88 crossing — and at least another two crossings nearby — was within 500 feet of an intersection. For at least 30 years prior to that, the forms had correctly noted that the crossings were within that distance, with a further notation that the crossings were within 75 feet of an intersection.

Completed versions of the forms submitted to the Federal Railroad Administration show that from 1970 to 1996 — a “yes” box is checked, with the further notation explaining the crossing is less than 75 feet from an intersection — but the “no” box is checked on forms submitted from 2003 to 2015.

“That’s a pretty key factor or parameter when you’re looking at the safety of a crossing,” said Ronald Eck, a civil engineering professor at West Virginia University who specializes in researching warning and traffic-control devices at road-level railroad crossings.

The misreporting of the information “creates some interesting safety issues,” Eck said.

The change in reporting occurred after BNSF Railway took ownership of the tracks, with all but one of the reports submitted since 2003 compiled by the railroad company. A spokesman declined to comment on the issue.

“The referenced crossing is owned and maintained by BNSF Railway. The investigation regarding the December accident is ongoing. It is BNSF policy not to comment on issues relevant to these matters until the investigation is completed,” Joseph Faust, a spokesman for the railway’s southern region, wrote in an emailed response to questions

Bill Shrewsberry, DOTD’s lead highway rail safety engineer, said the state uses that information to select and prioritize safety improvement projects. But, he said, the state discontinued submitting the information more than a decade ago in favor of maintaining an internal system.

“The state of Louisiana had problems with the (Federal Railroad Administration) — the lack of accuracy. We made a policy decision not to submit those updates,” Shrewsberry said.

Fatal crashes
Still, the federal agency data counts at least 13 accidents at the crossing since 1970, with at least three other deaths before December’s fatal crash. The most recent upgrade to the La. 88 crossing was the January 2015 installation of a sign warning drivers against stopping on the tracks, according to DOTD. Before that, crossing guards and lights were installed in 2003.

Bob Comer, an Ohio-based railroad accident investigator, reviewed the accident reports and pointed out a consistent pattern among the crashes.

“One of the most important details is what the vehicle was doing at the time of the crash,” Comer said. “What do I see over and over again? Stopped on the crossing. Now that’s a whole different situation than somebody driving around the lowered gate.”

Comer said the Leblanc family’s car wouldn’t have been trapped if a traffic signal had been installed at the intersection, one with a sensor that recognizes when vehicles are on the tracks and forces the light at the intersection to turn green when a train is approaching.

“All around the country, that has been done,” Comer said.

The Federal Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices recommends traffic signals at railroad crossings like the one at La. 88, which controls traffic through a stop sign and has a simple sign warning drivers against stopping on the tracks.

According to the manual — which the state transportation department follows — a traffic control signal should be considered at such a crossing if an engineering study determines it meets two criteria. The first is clear: that the rail crossing is within 140 feet of an intersection.

The second part is based on a model where the number of vehicles per hour using each of the two intersecting roadways is measured during the highest volume hour for rail traffic, and the information is plotted on the graph based on the distance from the crossing to the intersection. The point must be above the indicated curve.

But Louisiana transportation officials say a number of factors go into deciding what kinds of safety measures to put in place at a crossing, not just the number of accidents and fatalities. And, they say, traffic signaling systems aren’t always the best answer.

“You could actually be creating more contact points for accidents by putting a signal somewhere. There’s a lot of things that go into determining where a signal should be,” DOTD’s Shrewsberry said.

Allan Zarembski, research professor and director of Railroad Engineering and Safety Program at the University of Delaware, expressed a similar attitude toward linking traffic and railroad sensors.

“I have some serious concerns about that because of all the reaction times involved,” Zarembski said, pointing out that train sensors are sometimes known to malfunction too.

Zarembski reviewed the La. 88 crossing layout and noted issues with the design, but he said aggressive driver education also should be considered when it comes to crossing safety.

“No. 1, it’s a highway design problem. It shouldn’t have been designed that way,” Zarembski said.” Other part is a heavy-duty education problem.”

Journal News (OH) - South Hamilton Crossing project reaching milestone
January 24, 2016
Ed Richter

HAMILTON — The long awaited South Hamilton Crossing overpass project will hit a key milestone, as right of way acquisitions are expected to be completed sometime this week.

David Spinney, executive director of the Butler County Transportation Improvement District, told the Journal-News that the final documents and details, such the plans, specifications and approved environmental documents, could be forwarded to the Ohio Department of Transportation by the end of the week.

Spinney said the agency, which is working with the city of Hamilton, is awaiting the final sign-off on the construction agreement with CSX, which owns the rail track.
Spinney expects after the final ODOT review that bids could be solicited in early April, with a contract awarded in May.

The South Hamilton Crossing project will see Grand Boulevard elevate westbound traffic over the railroad tracks and intersect with Pleasant Avenue before connecting to University Boulevard. This project will also raise the attractiveness of about 50 acres of city-owned land in University Commerce Park along the east side of University Boulevard, city officials say.

It will also resolve a number of decades-old issues concerning traffic and public safety first responses to emergencies.

The project, which has been recognized as one of top critically needed infrastructure improvements in Butler and Warren counties, received a $3.75 million grant from the Federal Surface Transportation Program last fall. The city has partnered with the Butler County TID, ODOT, the Ohio-Kentucky-Indiana Regional Council of Governments, the Butler County Engineer’s Office and other agencies to keep the project moving forward.

The city is covering about half of the nearly $29 million project, and officials say construction could begin this year and be completed sometime in 2018.
“It’s taken awhile,” he said. “But this project is moving forward rapidly.”

Hamilton city officials have been discussing the South Hamilton Crossing project for more than 100 years, according to a history on the city’s website that was written by local historian Jim Blount. The crossing — where two lanes of Central Avenue cross four train tracks, owned by CSX and Norfolk Southern, to connect to Pleasant Avenue — has been a location for car accidents since at least 1910.

“From an economic development standpoint, this project not only affords substantially improved access to Miami University Hamilton, a key partner in Hamilton’s workforce development, but it also improves access to Vora Technology Park, home to one of Butler County’s largest job announcements in recent memory,” said Brandon Saurber, chief of staff for the city of Hamilton. “Finally, this project will give direct access to one of Hamilton’s greatest greenfield development opportunities at the 50-acre University Commerce Park.”

The large job announcement Saurber was referring to is the new Barclaycard facility at the Vora Technology Park that will bring 1,500 jobs to Hamilton.

Over the years, city officials have said in addition to the thousands of vehicles that use the current unsafe rail crossing, the new overpass will reduce congestion on High Street that comes through the city each day as the rail tracks bisect the city north and south and are mainlines for both the Norfolk Southern and CSX railroads. About 60 trains come through Hamilton each day and traffic is blocked at that crossing and nine others some 15 percent during the day.

Also, the new overpass will improve public safety response times for police, fire and emergency medical services to residents and businesses. If the tracks are blocked due to passing trains, it could mean a detour of three miles and a minimum of 10 minutes added to the response time on a busy day, city officials have previously said.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
LA Times - Bullet train's first segment, reserved for Southland, could open in Bay Area instead
January 23, 2016
Ralph Vatarbedian

A valuable perk handed to Southern California from the bullet train project — a 2012 decision to build the first operating segment from Burbank north into the Central Valley — is being reconsidered by state officials.

The state rail authority is studying an alternative to build the first segment in the Bay Area, running trains from San Jose to Bakersfield.

If the plan does change, it would be a significant reversal that carries big financial, technical and political impacts, especially in Southern California.

“You can’t ignore Southern California or Los Angeles or Orange County and say we are going to go north, period,” said Richard Katz, a longtime Southern California transportation official and former Assembly majority leader. “It made sense to start in the south, given the population and the serious transportation problems here.”
The original decision to start the initial segment in Burbank was considered a major economic benefit to the region, providing commuters with 15-minute rides to Palmdale, a connection to a future Las Vegas bullet train and an early link to the growing Central Valley.

But the state is facing major difficulties with the south-first plan. By building in the north initially, the state would delay the most difficult and expensive segment of the entire $68-billion project: traversing the geologically complex Tehachapi and San Gabriel mountains with a large system of tunnels and aerial structures.

With the project already behind schedule and facing estimates of higher costs, the Bay Area option could offer a faster, less risky and cheaper option. Getting even a portion of the project built early would help its political survival.

The outcome of the new evaluation will be known in the coming weeks, when the state unveils its 2016 Business Plan. The document will be the most comprehensive update for the $68-billion program in four years.

A decision to drop its plan to start the system in Southern California will not be popular among area civic leaders.

“I understand they have a difficult political situation, but they really need to come to Los Angeles,” said Art Leahy, chief executive of the Metrolink commuter rail system in Southern California.

“The southern route has a lot more ridership,” Leahy said. “The north is very important and I love the Bay Area, but the economic center of the state is in Southern California.”

The rail authority has been hinting at a potential change for months, starting last summer when it asked potential private investors to describe how they would help build an initial operating system from either the south or the north.

And in December, rail authority Chief Executive Jeff Morales said in a Sacramento television news interview that the agency was reconsidering its south-first strategy.

Rail authority spokeswoman Lisa Marie Alley said the plan to build an initial operating segment in the south was never final.

“The option to do an initial operating segment north has always been there,” she said.

Gov. Jerry Brown did not leave room for that possibility in 2013. In his State of the State address that year, he said the first phase of the future bullet train would start in the Central Valley and connect to Union Station in Los Angeles.

“The first phase will get us from Madera to Bakersfield,” Brown said. “Then we will take it through the Tehachapi Mountains to Palmdale, constructing 30 miles of tunnels and bridges.

“The first rail line through those mountains was built in 1874, and its top speed over the crest is still 24 miles an hour,” Brown said. “Then we will build another 33 miles of tunnels and bridges before we get the train to its destination at Union Station in the heart of Los Angeles.”

The governor’s latest State of the State speech, delivered Thursday, did not mention the bullet train. It had been included in each of his annual speeches since 2012.

The project has fallen two years behind schedule and faced a wide range of legal, political and technical challenges. A poll last week by Stanford University’s Hoover Institution found that 53% of voters wanted the change to reallocate funding from the bullet train project to water projects.

Among supporters, the bullet train is considered an important part of the state’s future transportation system. The existing Amtrak service from Los Angeles to the Bay Area requires travelers to board buses at Union Station for a trip over the 5 Freeway Grapevine to Bakersfield, where they transfer to trains that use the Burlington Northern Santa Fe freight tracks.

A bullet train would fill that gap and could connect Los Angeles to San Francisco in two hours and 40 minutes.

If the state does switch gears, it would come after a significant amount of work to accelerate the project in Southern California. Only last week, the rail authority signed an agreement with Burbank to provide $800,000 to explore a site for a future station.

Last year, rail authority officials had encouraged Burbank not to sell an airport parcel that might be used for the system. The rail authority in September said it was in discussion with a Chinese-based company to link its bullet trains to new high-speed trains to Las Vegas.

Delaying the southern section will not make the full project any cheaper, with the difficult crossing of the mountains north of Los Angeles becoming more expensive as that segment is delayed.

“The earlier you do it, the less the costs will grow,” said Mark Watts, interim director of Transportation California in Sacramento.

A 2013 cost estimate by the state’s leading management contractor, Parsons Brinckerhoff, projected that the initial operating segment from Merced to the San Fernando Valley would cost a staggering $40 billion, about $9 billion more than had been estimated.

The higher projected cost left the state with an even bigger shortfall in funding to build an initial segment. The state will have no more than roughly $15 billion in hand by 2022, when train service is supposed to start.

The initial operating segment is the cornerstone of the entire plan, allowing an early segment to attract private investors who would help finance the complete system.

“You have a much better chance of getting the north end built,” said Paul Dyson, president of the Passenger Rail Assn. of California. “I am from Southern California, but if it’s a difference between seeing a project get built or seeing it die, it would be better to start from the north.

“If you try to build it from the south, it could delay it by a couple of decades,” Dyson said. State rail officials have said the entire system will be completed by 2028.

Dyson said the state was “way too ambitious” in attempting to build a unified statewide system in a single program.

“We bit off more than we could chew,” he said.

AMTRAK
Home
Progressive Railroading - Amtrak's Harrisburg station to undergo improvements
January 22, 2016

Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf yesterday announced plans for improving the Amtrak Harrisburg Transportation Center and surrounding areas.

The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation envisions an initial investment of $15 million in federal and state money to bring the Transportation Center into a state of good repair, according to a press release issued by Wolf's office.

The initial investment would be followed by another $50 million to $60 million for station and land use improvements.

"Enhancing Pennsylvania’s transportation infrastructure is essential to the region’s economy and the Harrisburg Transportation Center is a vital hub that serves our Keystone Corridor passenger rail service, as well as intercity bus and local transit," said Wolf, noting that the center serves more than 1.6 million riders per year.

Michael Baker Corp. and a subcontractor known as BASE Architecture Planning and Engineering Inc. will conduct research and outreach as a first step toward a transit-oriented development plan, according to Wolf's office.

The former Pennsylvania Railroad Station, the Harrisburg center is the western terminal point for all but two of the 28 Amtrak trains that serve the station each day.

STATE BY STATE
Home
Chicago Tribune - Still 'work to do' on railroad safety
January 22, 2016
Steve Lord

Alot of progress has been made toward making railroad cars transporting hazardous materials safer.

But there is a lot more to be done.

That was the basic message at a roundtable meeting Friday morning at Aurora's Central Fire Station downtown featuring U.S. Sen. Richard Durbin, D-Illinois; U.S. Rep. Bill Foster, D-Naperville; and Aurora Mayor Tom Weisner. Also participating were Aurora fire Chief John Lehman, Oswego Fire District Chief Michael Veseling and Joe Jones, Aurora's emergency management director.

Weisner, a crusader among suburban Chicago mayors for railroad car safety, praised Durbin and Foster for their work in Congress. He said Durbin "has been on our side every day" since rail safety became more of an issue and said Foster has done "great work" as well in the U.S. House.

The issue has moved to the front-burner locally during the past few years, since the Canadian National Railroad bought the former Elgin, Joliet & Eastern railroad tracks and right of way and increased the amount of railroad traffic in the city. It has affected everything, from the disruption of traffic and emergency vehicles on the crossings, to the question of the safety of railroad cars carrying hazardous materials through communities along the way, area officials have said.

Durbin pointed out that five years ago, there was little crude oil hauled by the country's railroads. Today, there are more than 1.1 billion barrels a day moved by rail, with more expected. Much of that originates or moves through the Midwest, officials said.

"Nowhere are cities more in danger than our cities in northern Illinois," Foster said.

Two major pieces of legislation have helped the situation recently, officials at the meeting said. The Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act — which is the first comprehensive transportation bill passed by Congress in about 10 years — includes several items to improve safety of railroad tank cars. It includes a study on crude oil volatility, requires new and retrofitted tank cars to be equipped with thermal blankets, requires the U.S. Department of Transportation to issue regulations regarding better information to first responders on oil spills, and closes loopholes in regulations that allow shippers to keep using older-model tank cars.

The other bill, the 2016 Omnibus spending bill, contains some safety measures but also funding for rail safety grants and highway-railroad grade crossings.

In addition, Durbin has co-sponsored two bills that would phase out old, weaker tank cars in two years, rather than three years, and that establish a $175-a-car fee on crude and ethanol shipped in those old cars to be used for training first responders, for cleanup in the event there is an accident, for hiring additional inspectors, and for rail-line relocation.

Durbin said there is no doubt that rail safety is a bigger issue than it has been, and he pointed out that the Federal Railroad Administration, during the 2015 fiscal year, collected $15 million in fines for about 6,500 violations, both records. He said a lot of that is because the "message from both sides of the aisle" in Congress had put more pressure on regulatory agencies to monitor violations.

He said he knows government regulation gets a bad name and said it sometimes deserves that "in the extreme." But he said this is a case where regulation has been needed.

"It's one of the few things we can turn to to enforce safety," he said.

Lehman pointed out that at the meeting, they were sitting less than 300 feet from where trains come through downtown Aurora throughout the day. At that moment, several trains roared by. Durbin, who grew up in a railroad family and even worked on the railroad himself at one time, pointed out that one train was carrying oil in one direction, and the other was carrying coal in another direction.

Lehman said that in 2014 a little under 50,000 tank cars came through town; by last year, that number increased to 120,000 tank cars.

"We see these through here on a daily basis," he said.

Veseling said the immediate impact in the case of an accident near Aurora or Oswego would be "disastrous" and the long-term result "could be catastrophic."

He said first responders still have trouble getting information from the railroads during an accident and said fire departments have to get more foam and coordinate how it would become available in the case of an explosion and fire.

"Some of your efforts have been phenomenal," Veseling told Durbin and Foster, "but there is still some work to do."

Chicago Sun Times - Railroads have deep ties to Illinois pols
January 23, 2016

For railroads, 2015 was an eventful year, with Congress dedicating more than $10 billion toward rail and other freight infrastructure projects and acquiescing to demands by the rail industry to extend the deadline for costly safety improvements on trains.

The past few years have been good for members of Congress from Illinois too, who collected more than $635,000 in campaign donations from the rail industry.


Several members of the Illinois congressional delegation were prominent players in negotiating legislation involving the railroad industry, a natural role given that Illinois has the second-largest rail network in the nation, with roughly 10,000 miles of track and 17,000 workers.

“My vote is not for sale,” U.S. Rep. Bill Foster, D-Ill., said in an email, a message echoed by other Congress members.

The rail industry said the intent of the donations was to show support for senators and representatives who understand the importance of its business.


Critics, meanwhile, say the timing of some campaign contributions raises questions about improper influence and the need for campaign finance reforms.

“The system is as much legalized shake-down as legalized bribery,” said Meredith McGehee, policy director at the Campaign Legal Center, a nonprofit that advocates for campaign finance reform, based in Washington, D.C. “Business feels strongly that you have to pay to play.”

Chicago is the nation’s rail hub, but not an efficient one. Despite recent investments in infrastructure, it still takes 32 hours to transport freight through the Chicago area via rail, frustrating shippers. Motorists also gripe about getting stuck at the many grade-level rail crossings where trains carrying everything from oil and coal to food and farm products rumble through.

U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., and U.S. Rep. Dan Lipinski, D-Ill., played crucial roles in a 2015 transportation bill that, among other things, authorized $10.8 billion in federal funding for freight projects, including efforts to untangle rail bottlenecks in the Chicago area by building underpasses and overpasses to separate freight trains from roads and passenger trains.

Durbin and Lipinski were part of a conference committee that ironed out differences between the House and Senate versions of the funding bill, resulting in a bipartisan compromise that easily passed and became law in December.

In November, when final negotiations were underway, the political action committees formed by four major freight railroads — BNSF Railway, CSX, Norfolk Southern and Union Pacific, all operating in Illinois — donated $5,000 apiece, $20,000 total, to one of Durbin’s political funds, records show.

A Durbin spokesman said the timing was a coincidence, with PACs tending to give donations toward the end of the year.

“We’re supportive of candidates who are supportive of our industry,” BNSF spokesman Mike Trevino said, speaking generally.

Durbin is not up for re-election in 2016 but, like many in Congress, can use his political funds to distribute money to other candidates.

Lipinski, who is running for another term in 2016, received $25,000 from the railroad PACs in 2015, records show.

In December, Durbin led nine other Illinois Democrats in writing a letter to the Surface Transportation Board, asking the panel to take a hard look at a takeover attempt of Norfolk Southern by Canadian Pacific. Norfolk Southern was trying to fend off the takeover, and Durbin and the others spoke up for Norfolk Southern, expressing concerns about Illinois jobs.

In November, a Durbin campaign fund received a $5,000 contribution from Norfolk Southern’s PAC, which in 2015 also gave $5,000 to Lipinski’s campaign; $7,000 to the campaign of U.S. Rep. Cheri Bustos, D-Ill.; $2,500 to the campaign of U.S. Rep. Mike Quigley, D-Ill.; and $1,000 to the campaign of U.S. Rep. Bobby Rush, D-Ill., according to Federal Election Commission records. They all signed the letter with Durbin.

All told, Illinois members of Congress received $227,700 in campaign donations from railroad PACs in the first year of the 2015-2016 election cycle, and $407,600 during the two years of the 2013-2014 election cycle, according to records from the FEC and the Center for Responsive Politics. Four of those members are on key transportation-related committees and fielded the largest donations.

The PACs are funded with employee contributions. Unlike state and local politicians, federal candidates cannot accept direct corporate contributions.

U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., who faces re-election this year, was a big recipient of railroad PAC donations, receiving $28,000 in 2015. Kirk played a key role in enhancing a low-interest loan program for railroad infrastructure last year.

Kirk, Durbin and U.S. Rep. Bob Dold, R-Ill., successfully pushed for changes to cut red tape and expand eligibility for $35 billion in loans for railroad projects through the Federal Railroad Administration, the federal agency regulating the rail industry. Among other things, the loans may help pay for the renovation of Chicago’s historic Union Station, which serves Amtrak and Metra.

Another critical issue for the railroads in 2015 was the end-of-the-year deadline — set seven years ago — to install high-tech safety equipment in trains, or “positive train control,” that could override human error and prevent collisions. Industry leaders said that wasn’t enough time.

“Look, this was a law that was passed that required technology that did not exist. So it had to be created, and it had to be tested to see if it functioned as it was intended,” BNSF’s Trevino said.

During the summer, railroads warned Congress that it was impossible to meet the deadline, and they would be forced to shut down to avoid hefty fines.

U.S. Rep. Robin Kelly, D-Ill., said she heard from “farmers, manufacturers and retailers in Illinois” in support of the extension “to avoid disruption of supply of vital commodities.”

The Illinois delegation got on board and this past September, 14 of the 18 U.S. House members co-sponsored a bill to extend the deadline. Both U.S. senators from Illinois agreed. Ultimately, Congress granted a five-year extension.

“It’s not something that we’ve been ignoring. It’s something that’s been a priority,” said Ed Greenberg, spokesman for the Association of American Railroads, who relayed that railroads have spent $6 billion on the safety improvements and will spend at least $3 billion more to finish the job.

The rail industry scored another victory in December, when a Lipinski-sponsored amendment to the funding bill passed, requiring the retrofitting of older tank cars to help prevent explosions and fires. The rail industry lobbied for the safety measure, knowing the costs would be paid by the oil shipping companies that own the tank cars.

Lipinski acknowledged about his campaign fundraising, “I solicit the railroads as I solicit a lot of entities, the PACS, political action committees, that are out there. . . . It’s one of the industries that gives to me.”

But Lipinski said donations don’t influence him.

“I don’t think my actions change in any kind of way. It’s important that things get done here in Chicago, for moving freight through the area, for getting other things done to help alleviate all the issues that my constituents face with getting stuck at rail crossings, or any of the other issues that they have because of inconvenience that railroads cause to them,” he said.

New York Times - In Philadelphia, Batteries on Transit System Power More Than Just the Trains
January 21, 2016
Diane Cardwell

Along Philadelphia’s busy Market-Frankford subway line, the trains behave like those of any transit system, slowing to halt at the platforms and picking up passengers.

But more is happening than meets the eye. In an experimental system that is soon to be more widely adopted, every time the trains pull into certain stations, they recover the kinetic energy as they brake and channel it as electricity to battery banks at one of two substations.

The batteries, managed by software, can then use that power to push the trains back out or to help modulate electricity flows on the grid.

The system is unusual because the batteries are being used for more than just powering the trains, said Gary Fromer, senior vice president for distributed energy at Constellation, the power provider that will own and operate the system for the transportation authority.

The electricity savings alone do not justify the battery costs, he said, so it was important to find another source of revenue, which comes from selling energy services to the grid.

“If battery storage is going to work,” he said, “most of it needs to look like this.”

It has been so successful that officials at the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, or Septa, said on Thursday that they are expanding to seven more stations. Officials estimate the program has already saved about $40,000 in electricity costs for each substation and brought in revenue of $250,000 a year since it started running in 2012.

“We don’t have to front the money and we’re reaping both savings and actually money coming back our way,” said Jeffrey D. Knueppel, general manager of the transportation authority. The base technology of the system, known as regenerative braking, was one of the breakthroughs that allowed for the development of hybrid and electric cars like the Prius.

It has been used in locomotives for years, but operators have only recently been finding ways to recycle the energy into electricity to power their fleets. Amtrak, for instance, is replacing its electric locomotives with newer models that allow for recycling all of the regenerated energy as electricity for its system, rather than converting some of it to heat.

And a few places have begun to experiment with different ways to harvest brake power in public transit. In Portland, Ore., a supercapacitor helps collect and dispense the energy on its light rail system. In Los Angeles, transit officials are testing the use of flywheel-based storage on the expanding Metro, part of efforts to reduce costs and increase the options to meet ambitious environmental goals. London is exploring the use of regenerated energy for its Underground, as well.

But the Philadelphia program has broader implications.

Co-funded with a grant from the Department of Energy, the pilot program began with a proposal from the energy services company Viridity, which is providing the energy market services and software. The banks of lithium ion batteries tie into the regional system operator, PJM, which can send a signal for the batteries to charge or discharge at a given time to regulate how much power is flowing into or out of the grid.

Chad Von Eck, vice president for storage at Viridity, said that the company was talking to several other rail companies about putting in similar systems.

“Most major transit agencies in the urban hubs have added this capability over the last 10 to 15 years,” he said. “And so a lot of them are already realizing the value of the core regenerative braking capability.”

For those that do not have the system, Mr. Von Eck said, the savings are there for the taking.

“These traction power systems, these networks, are just really waiting for batteries to be placed next to them to make them more efficient and make them a more valuable asset.”


3


