 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 27, 2016
TV & RADIO
Six rail cars containing vegetable oil end up in Mississippi River after a train derailment	2
CP Railroad train derails 15 cars, 6 end up in Mississippi River	2
CP train derails sending tanker full of sodium chlorate into Mississippi River	2
Engineer distracted by radio chatter in Amtrak 188 accident	2
New theory emerges on cause of Amtrak 188 accident	2
NTSB to release new information on cause of Amtrak 188 accident	2
Investigators have new theory on Amtrak 188	2
The financial side of the potential merger of CP and NS	2
Vermont Railroad says federal regulations preempt local jurisdictions, locals seeking injunction on construction project	3
Train accident causing delay for Metro-North riders	3
NATIONAL NEWS
Wall Street Journal - Energy-Market Slump Weighs on Big Railroads	3
The Hill - Dem wants Senate hearing on freight rail merger	5
Reuters - West Virginia senator wants probe of Canadian Pacific plan to buy rival	6
RAIL INCIDENTS
WXOW (MN) - Six cars derail from train near Reno, Minnesota	7
METRO NORTH
Pougkeepsie Journal (NY) - Metro-North workers cash in to fix rails	8
ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
TC Palm (FL) - Exclusive Special Report: All Aboard Florida sought $1.875 billion in federal loans	12
AMTRAK
VOX (IL) - After 8 months, the deadly Amtrak crash is still a mystery — but here are 2 theories	14
Effingham Daily News (IL) - Amtrak cuts proposed by governor fail to materialize	15
The Hill - Amtrak to test restoration of rail service lost since Katrina	16
STATE BY STATE
The State Journal (IL) - Archaeological site latest question mark for 10th Street rail consolidation plan	17


TV & RADIO
Home
Six rail cars containing vegetable oil end up in Mississippi River after a train derailment
KTTC (NBC) - Rochester, MN

CP Railroad train derails 15 cars, 6 end up in Mississippi River
KAAL (ABC) - Rochester, MN

CP train derails sending tanker full of sodium chlorate into Mississippi River
WISN-MKE (ABC) - Milwaukee, WI

Engineer distracted by radio chatter in Amtrak 188 accident
KFOX (FOX) - El Paso, TX

New theory emerges on cause of Amtrak 188 accident 
News 12 Bronx - New York, NY

NTSB to release new information on cause of Amtrak 188 accident
WGXA (FOX) - Macon, GA

Investigators have new theory on Amtrak 188
WTXF-PHI (FOX) - Philadelphia, PA

The financial side of the potential merger of CP and NS
KFOR-OKC (NBC) - Oklahoma City, OK

Vermont Railroad says federal regulations preempt local jurisdictions, locals seeking injunction on construction project
WCAX-BUR (CBS) - Burlington, VT

Train accident causing delay for Metro-North riders
WTIC-HFD (FOX) - Hartford-New Haven, CT

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Wall Street Journal - Energy-Market Slump Weighs on Big Railroads
January 26, 2016
Laura Stevens and Betsey Morris

The dismal energy market slammed two of North America’s biggest freight railroads in the fourth quarter, prompting them to slash jobs and driving profits below Wall Street’s expectations.

Union Pacific Corp. said it furloughed 3,900 employees last year amid steep declines in shipments of coal, crude oil and fracking sand. These, plus a sharp drop in fuel-surcharge revenue, pressured fourth-quarter profit down 22% to $1.12 billion.

Meanwhile, Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd., which has so far been stymied in an effort to take over U.S. rival Norfolk Southern Corp., said it would cut up to 1,000 jobs this year and posted a nearly 30% drop in earnings to 319 million Canadian dollars ($220 million).

The reports come a week after executives at CSX Corp. said the current pressures on rail volumes were at levels not seen outside of a recession.

The effects of the oil-market bust on the rail industry’s crude-related businesses were especially evident in the latest quarter.
At CP, whose network stretches across Canada and into the U.S., total carloads fell about 6% during the quarter, with declines in all but three categories of cargo. Some of the greatest declines were in CP’s crude-oil shipments, which fell 17%, and its metals, minerals and consumer-products shipments which plunged 24%.

“We’ve seen [in] the last three quarters of 2015 the economic headwinds across all business segments except for a couple of bright spots in forest products and Canadian grain,” said CP Chief Operating Officer Keith Creel. He said the strong U.S. dollar and low commodity prices weighed on business in the company’s bulk, energy and metals segments.

At Union Pacific, which is most active in the Western U.S., shipments of crude oil plunged 42% and loads of fracking sand used to drill oil and natural-gas wells fell by more than half in the quarter. Shipments of coal, one of Union Pacific’s largest businesses, fell by a fifth as temperatures were warmer than average and power plants used more natural gas.

“Another quarter of solid pricing gains were not enough to offset the 9% decrease in total volumes,” Chief Executive Lance Fritz said on an earnings call with analysts.

The net impact of lower fuel prices, including the decline in fuel-surcharge revenues, was estimated to have reduced Union Pacific’s earnings per share by 11 cents from a year before. It earned $1.31 a share, coming in below the $1.42 forecast by analysts polled by Thomson Reuters. Adjusted to exclude items such as foreign exchange fluctuations, Canadian Pacific earned C$2.72 a share, below the C$2.78 a share analysts expected.

Energy will continue to weigh on earnings in the first quarter, Union Pacific executives said.

Coal volume is expected to decline by about 20% in the quarter and full-year total volumes are expected to be slightly down, depending on the overall economy.

CP’s Mr. Creel said he expects total volumes to be “modestly down” this year: “We see again modest single-digit reduction in carloads,” he told analysts. Crude oil is going to be a headwind. “I don’t see any shining stars out there in the economy.”

Union Pacific executives said they were getting mixed economic signals from U.S. consumers. It appears that consumer spending is shifting away from goods, like retail, and more toward services, they said. While auto shipments rose 8% in the quarter, executives cautioned that auto sales might not be sustainable at current record levels.

Both railroads fielded questions about Canadian Pacific’s contentious, roughly $30 billion bid for Norfolk Southern.

Though not commenting on CP’s bid directly, Union Pacific’s Mr. Fritz echoed the fierce rail-industry opposition to a deal that has developed in the U.S. He said he doesn’t think a big rail merger would improve rail safety or efficiency and that it would be a “disincentive to capital investment.”

The opposition has spread beyond the rail industry to manufacturing and other trade associations. And CP’s effort will be scrutinized not only by the U.S. Surface Transportation Board, which approves rail mergers, but other regulators and lawmakers.

CP’s chief executive, Hunter Harrison, said he might need to change his strategy as a result of these developments. “Things have changed, and so will that change potentially some of our strategy? Absolutely,” he said.

“Understand that when you’re playing the game and somebody changes the rules on you, you have to review your strategy as far as going forward, and the rules are moving on us as we speak,” he said.

He specifically cited the concern, raised by the Federal Railroad Administrator in The Wall Street Journal last week, that combining two corporate safety cultures can result in problems. “I’ve never heard that argument in my life,” Mr. Harrison said.

Mr. Harrison said he has personally spoken to more than half of all Norfolk Southern shareholders or their representatives, and they have indicated “they would be in support of [it], but they don’t call all the shots,” he added.

Union Pacific’s stock closed 3.6% lower at $71.00, which is down 43% from the 52-week high hit in February. U.S.-traded shares of Canadian Pacific, which fell more than 5% in early morning trading, closed up 0.5% higher at $104.67.

The Hill - Dem wants Senate hearing on freight rail merger
January 26, 2016
Keith Laing

Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) is calling for a Senate hearing on a proposed merger between Canadian Pacific Railway and Norfolk Southern, which he has dubbed a "Wall Street takeover" of a prominent U.S. freight company. 

Calgary-based Canadian Pacific Railway has been making overtures to Virginia-based Norfolk Southern about a potential combination it says would "create a truly transcontinental railroad to better serve customers and the economy." 

Manchin, a member of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, on Tuesday said the proposed merger "is an attempt by a Wall Street titan to purchase and dismantle an American rail company that has provided jobs for hundreds of West Virginians.”  

He called on lawmakers in the Senate to investigate the proposed combination, which he said "creates real and present dangers to hardworking people of West Virginia." 
“We can't get any specifics from Hunter Harrison or Bill Ackman about where the $1.8 billion will come from in this deal with Norfolk Southern, but we know the harm they have done at Canadian Pacific," Manchin said in a statement. 

"I’m calling for a Commerce Committee investigation into this merger because I want to ask Hunter Harrison what they are going to invest in, what they are going to build, and how they are going to help the people and the communities of our state," Manchin continued.

"West Virginia cannot afford a corporate partner more focused on short-term gains for stockholders than the hard-working men and women who show up to work every day. In this economy, I'm going to fight to protect every single West Virginian job I can."

Canadian Pacific has said it is "confident that a CP-NS combination would secure regulatory approval as a seamless coast-to-coast single-haul service benefits shippers, the industry and the public, and would generate tremendous shareholder value." 

Norfolk Southern has rejected previous offers from Canadian Pacific, saying its board of directors "has unanimously determined that your latest revised proposal is grossly inadequate, creates substantial regulatory risks and uncertainties that are highly unlikely to be overcome, and is not in the best interest of the Company and its shareholders." 

Manchin's office said Tuesday that the senator wants to put the brakes on the potential merger for good. 

"Sen. Manchin is insisting that the details of this merger be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation before any element of this transaction is allowed to proceed," the senator's office said.

"Canadian Pacific Railway’s attempt to acquire Norfolk Southern is troubling because of Canadian Pacific Railway’s history of cutting jobs to increase investor profits," Manchin's office continued. 

"For years, Norfolk Southern has been committed not just to its shareholders, but to its employees and to the West Virginia communities it serves. Norfolk Southern currently employs 990 people and supports 430 retirees in the Mountain State."

Reuters - West Virginia senator wants probe of Canadian Pacific plan to buy rival
January 26, 2016
Diane Bartz

West Virginia Senator Joe Manchin called on Tuesday for a congressional hearing to discuss Canadian Pacific Railway's plan to buy Norfolk Southern, saying it could cost people in his state their jobs.

Canadian Pacific Railway, the No. 2 Canadian railroad, made an unsolicited $28 billion offer for the U.S. railroad Norfolk Southern in November. Norfolk Southern has repeatedly rejected the advances, saying the proposed terms were "grossly inadequate" and that a deal would face substantial regulatory risks.

Manchin, a Democrat, called on Tuesday for the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation to hold a hearing on the proposed deal.

He argued that Canadian Pacific was already aggressively slashing jobs because of pressure from investors, including saying last week that it planned to cut nearly 1,000 jobs in 2016.

"This merger creates real and present dangers to hardworking people of West Virginia. I’m calling for a Commerce Committee investigation into this merger because I want to ask (Canadian Pacific Executive Officer) Hunter Harrison what they are going to invest in, what they are going to build, and how they are going to help the people and the communities of our state," said Manchin.

The deal - which is not official - has already attracted criticism from industry groups representing freight customers, the Transportation Communications Union/International Association of Machinists as well as Representatives Peter DeFazio of Oregon and Michael Capuano of Massachusetts, both Democrats, and Democratic Senator Amy Klobuchar, ranking member of the Senate Judiciary Committee's antitrust subcommittee.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
WXOW (MN) - Six cars derail from train near Reno, Minnesota
January 26, 2016

RENO, Minn. (WXOW) - -
Emergency crews were on the scene of a train derailment near Reno, Minnesota early Wednesday morning.

?The derailment of the Canadian Pacific train happened around 11:00 p.m. Tuesday. There were no injuries.

Brownsville Fire Chief Gary Meiners told WXOW that there are six cars off the tracks with another seven or eight cars unstable behind the derailment.

Houston County Sheriff Mark Inglett said that two cars broke through the ice and are in the water. One car, carrying grain, is mildly leaking. The second car, carrying sodium chlorate, doesn't appear to be leaking. He called the situation stable.

Sodium chlorate is used primarily in the paper making process. It is also used in herbicides.

A hazmat team from Winona was on the scene of the derailment site to assess the situation. A crew from the U.S. Coast Guard Pollution Response Unit was also at the site.

"It went smoothly. Personnel was here within a short period of time. CP rail had higher level management type people here on scene within a couple of hours. So that part I was impressed with," said Sheriff Inglett.

The railroad tracks are parallel to Minnesota State Highway 26 along the Mississippi River.

Highway 26 is open once again to traffic. Sheriff Inglett said that drivers can expect one lane closed to traffic as crews complete the cleanup process starting around 5:30 a.m. Wednesday morning.

"We're always concerned about train derailments," said Sheriff Inglett, "Train traffic has picked up considerably in the last year or so. And that's where everybody's concern is, especially with the oil tankers and stuff like that. So we're always trying to prepare for them."

Reno, Minnesota is approximately seven miles south of Brownsville and about eight miles north of the Iowa border.

The Houston County Sheriff's Department, Brownsville Fire Department, Minnesota State Patrol, and the Minnesota DOT all responded to the derailment.

WXOW's Daybreak and WXOW.com for updates on this story.  

METRO NORTH
Home
Pougkeepsie Journal (NY) - Metro-North workers cash in to fix rails
January 26, 2016
Thomas Zambito

Eduardo Vargas logged 5,043 hours last year fixing the machinery Metro-North uses to repair its track, which averages roughly to 14-hour days, seven days a week for an entire year. Vargas’ overtime for 2013 and 2014 — when Metro-North was rallying to repair long-neglected tracks amid several derailments — totaled more than $300,000. In 2014, Vargas’ $309,000 total payout ranked him third among all Metro-North employees. Vargas, a machinist, earned some $41,000 more than the commuter rail’s president, Joseph Giulietti, that year, according to Metro-North labor costs obtained through a Freedom of Information request.

“These high numbers are definitely an eyebrow raiser for me,” said Tim Hoefer, the executive director of the Empire Center, a fiscally conservative think tank in Albany that studies MTA overtime. “At the very least they warrant asking questions about the spending and whether or not projects and hours are being managed properly.”

Vargas is not alone.

In recent years, workers who repair and maintain Metro-North’s 775 miles of track have supplanted engineers and conductors for the top spots among the railroad’s biggest overtime earners, according to the documents. At least 40 track workers made more in overtime than they did in salary in 2013 and 2014, with half of those making six figures in overtime alone, the data show.

Two other rail workers stand out for their overtime totals.

Track supervisor Robert M. O’Connell worked 4,876 hours last year, meaning he would have had to work a little more than 13-hour days every day of the year, records show. He led Metro-North with $154,000 in overtime in 2013, allowing him to triple his $74,000 annual salary. And in 2014 O’Connell pulled in $184,000 in overtime.

Track supervisor Richard R. Bourt Jr. worked 3,832 hours last year, Metro-North says. In 2013, Bourt ranked third in overtime with $141,000, nearly tripling his $75,000 salary. In 2014, he made $169,000 in overtime and a salary of $77,000.

The findings come as Metro-North’s overtime costs have soared to their highest levels in years. Last year, the railroad paid out some $89 million in overtime after handing out $98 million in 2014, up from $68 million in 2013 and $55 million in 2012. Overtime for track workers has ranged between $10 million and $15 million in recent years, Metro-North said.

But Metro-North said the year-by-year increase is artificially higher than it should be since a large chunk of the recent payouts are due to retroactive salary and overtime increases resulting from a labor agreement in 2013. And they said back-to-back winters with heavy snowfall that fell on weekends contributed as well.

By Metro-North’s calculations, overtime would have been some $20 million lower in 2014, while figures for 2012 and 2013 would have been higher. The 2014 total represented 19.2 percent of Metro-North’s total payroll, up from 15.6 percent in 2011.

Costly mistakes

How did this happen? How did some track workers double and, in some cases, nearly triple their salaries?

The answer is rooted in the costly, sometimes deadly, mistakes that conspired to take the glint off the reputation of a commuter rail regarded among the nation’s best and forced a top-to-bottom re-examination of whether passenger safety was sacrificed in the rush to keep trains on time.

“I’ve made it a point to not be critical of the past administrations but, at the end of the day, we have to admit that we’re still in a situation right now that maintenance got deferred,” Giulietti told The Journal News. “We’re trying to now catch up.”

The beginnings of the track workers’ surging overtime payouts dates to May 2013 when a New Haven line train bounded off the tracks in Bridgeport, Connecticut. It sideswiped an oncoming train, injuring more than 70 passengers. Bourt was among those who supervised track workers who repaired the tracks in the area following the crash.

It continued through July 2013 when a CSX train carrying municipal garbage went off the rails in the Bronx. No one was injured in a crash that federal officials attributed to track failure, including crumbling concrete rail ties.

The derailments, coupled with the deaths of two track workers and a derailment in December 2013 that killed four passengers when an engineer fell asleep at the controls, reverberated through Metro-North.

“The most important part for all of our passengers is can they rely on the trains and know that the trains are going to be there,” said Giulietti. “That’s kind of what we lost. We lost that by adding more and more trains and not taking care of the core maintenance responsibilities, and that’s what we’re trying to get back to.”

An investigation by The Journal News shows that a host of factors contributed to the overtime payouts for track workers.

Among them:

•Overdue track repairs. Federal investigators found that ties used to hold rails together were not being regularly inspected, repaired and replaced.

•Loss of skilled workers. A “hollowed-out” workforce lost to retirements left the railroad with a dwindling number of workers with the skills to perform key tasks along the tracks.

•Track workers are scheduled to work regular weekday shifts but log overtime for night and weekend work when the bulk of the repairs need to get done. Unlike other Metro-North workers, nothing prevents them from working around the clock.

•Veteran workers get first crack at overtime, a longstanding practice which allows those in their last years on the job to bump up their pension payouts.

Since May 2013, Metro-North workers have replaced some 100,000 railroad ties. Nearly 17 miles of rails have been welded and 32 railroad crossings were improved.

In a statement issued last month, Giulietti heralded the “extraordinary system-wide track-reconstruction effort.”

“Our rails are safer today as a result of this concerted increase in track-renewal work,” he said.

Metro-North has revamped the way it detects track flaws and identifies metal fatigue, and employs state-of-the-art track geometry cars to ensure that rails remain smooth.

But it’s come with a hefty price. Some $11 million was spent on a drainage project after concrete ties in the Bronx were damaged by water. Another $2.5 million went to a Colorado-based consulting company which investigated the railroad’s track failures and offered recommendations.

The Bridgeport derailment caused $18.5 million in property damage and has led to more than $10 million in settlement and legal costs to resolve lawsuits filed by passengers and workers aboard the trains, records show. The CSX accident caused nearly $1 million in property damage.

Playing catch up

Giulietti says the cost likely won’t be passed along to riders in the way of ticket fares, which have increased five times over the past seven years. But it means that capital projects like the purchase of new train cars and other upgrades will be delayed as the railroad plays catch up with its maintenance.

“If you look at our capital program for the next five years, somewhere in the vicinity of 80 to 90 percent is just for state of good repair,” Giulietti said. “It would be nice to have a capital program dedicated toward what are the next levels that we’re going to take this service to, but we’re not there yet.”

Giulietti replaced Howard Permut in February 2014 in the months after the Bronx derailment killed four and unleashed a series of federal safety investigations.

The crash had been the deadliest in Metro-North’s history until February 2015 when a commuter train slammed into a sport-utility vehicle at a grade crossing in Valhalla. Six died, including the SUV driver, Ellen Brody of Edgemont.

Giulietti refocused the railroad’s attention to fixing and repairing its track, starting in Bridgeport and the Bronx.

In Bridgeport, the National Transportation Safety Board investigators cited Metro-North for not assigning someone to visually walk the track to look for potential dangers.

The NTSB said the derailment of a rush-hour train was caused by a broken joint bar that left a gap between two pieces of rail that were not welded together properly. A Metro-North vice president told federal investigators the railroad lacked skilled welders.

“He said that many of the welders with the skill level to perform the recommended welding technique had retired,” the 2014 report said.

Giulietti said retirements have contributed to overtime payouts for track work.

“Right now we’re catching up with the fact that we had a 30-year plateau, an awful lot of people walked out the door and we’re tying to fill positions,” he said. “And while we’re trying to fill positions we have to cover with overtime.”

Union work rules

Unlike conductors and engineers, track workers are not bound by so-called “hours of service” rules that would prevent them from working long days. Many refuse promotions because it would mean a reduction in pay, according to a report prepared by a Metro-North consultant.

Giulietti acknowledged that fatigue is an issue, especially in the wake of the Bronx derailment.

Federal investigators found that engineer William Rockefeller was suffering from an undiagnosed case of sleep apnea and a recent shift change.

Since then, all Metro-North engineers have been tested for sleep apnea.

“Even if I want to, I cannot turn around and designate that the lead person there shouldn’t get the overtime because of the amount of hours they’ve already worked,” Giulietti said.

For those nearing retirement, the payouts will factor into their pensions, which are based on their average pay in the last five years on the job. O’Connell, who started in 1978, is among the railroad’s most senior track supervisors. Bourt started in 1984, Vargas in 1994, records show.

For the next few years, though, Giulietti says the work will continue.

“We have to expend what we’re spending now to get the railroad back,” he said. “There isn’t another answer at this moment in time ... Thank God we’ve got employees that are willing to put in the additional time to bring this railroad back.”


ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
Home
TC Palm (FL) - Exclusive Special Report: All Aboard Florida sought $1.875 billion in federal loans
January 26, 2016
Lisa Broadt
All Aboard Florida requested $1.875 billion in federal loans to help build its high-speed passenger rail line, according to public records — though the private rail company contends its federal loan request stands at $1.6 billion.

All Aboard Florida submitted the $1.875 billion loan application on March 15, 2013. The Federal Railroad Administration had not completed its assessment of the application or made any decision on issuing the loan as of Aug. 15, according to a letter attached to the application.

But since filing the application, the request has decreased, according to All Aboard Florida.

“As we have publicly stated, our current pending ... loan request is for $1.6 billion,” All Aboard spokeswoman Michelle Meier said, “there is nothing further that we have to share at this time.” All Aboard declined to share any supporting documents. 

Scripps Treasure Coast Newspapers requested all versions of the loan application; no application changes were included in the file.

The two loan documents totaling 189 pages obtained by Scripps lay out All Aboard Florida’s plan to run 32 passenger trains along the Florida East Coast Railway, from Miami to Orlando, every day.

The loan request is split into two parts: The company requested $740 million for the 66.5-mile stretch from Miami to West Palm Beach and $1.135 billion for the 168.5 miles from West Palm to Orlando.

Nearly all other financial information in the documents, however, was redacted. Under federal law, documents that would disclose trade secrets can be withheld from public records requests.

But the documents did reveal new information.

All Aboard Florida’s passenger rail and Florida East Coast Railway’s freight trains will interconnect, according to the loan document. As Scripps previously reported, All Aboard Florida will build a second track along the existing Florida East Coast Railway corridor, currently used for freight.

Infrastructure improvements could allow for a greater volume of freight trains running at “somewhat higher speeds within the 128.5-mile corridor between Cocoa and West Palm Beach,” All Aboard Florida said in the loan application.

The company said in the application it plans to upgrade its freight and passenger tracks from Class 4 — the most common mainline track in the United States — to Class 6.

As a Class 6, freight and passenger could run at speeds up to 110 mph, though that’s unlikely for freight, according to Bob Ledoux, FEC senior vice president and general counsel.

Freight currently moves somewhere between 45 to 60 mph but with the rail upgrades those speeds could rise to about 70 mph, Ledoux said.

“But there aren’t any passengers sitting there waiting for the train,” he said. “Going faster doesn’t necessarily benefit us.”

All Aboard Florida’s capacity models have “assumed operation of additional freight trains to accommodate the future freight growth,” according to the loan request, and needed improvements to track and signal infrastructure are planned.

Freight will continue to run as passenger rail is built and upgraded, according to the loan application.

Other previously unknown and updated information:

• The environmental impact statement is nearly one year behind the schedule suggested by All Aboard Florida in the loan application. The document — a highly anticipated report expected to answer many remaining questions about All Aboard Florida — was scheduled for draft release in October 2013. But the FRA, which is responsible for the report, says there is no anticipated or announced release date.

• All Aboard will have 10 train sets with eight in service and two in the Orlando Maintenance Facility. Trains will rotate through service. Each train will consist of two locomotives, two business cars, one café/economy car and four economy/coach cars.

Federal law allowed All Aboard to flag any information that would disclose trade secrets or that contained certain confidential financial information. The Federal Railroad Administration then reviewed and redacted that information, according to a letter attached to the Railroad Rehabilitation and Improvement Financing Program loan application sent to Scripps.

Among the redacted information was:

* A ridership study, intended to determine whether the project will “meet existing needs for such service.”
* All Aboard Florida’s financial model.
* Its business plan.
* A description of the collateral it will put up for the loan, though documents previously obtained by Scripps Treasure Coast Newspapers, indicated All Aboard Florida would use the Florida East Coast Railway tracks as collateral, should it default on the mammoth federal loan.
* About This Story
* As part of its continuing coverage of All Aboard Florida’s plans for high-speed rail through the Treasure Coast, Scripps Treasure Coast Newspapers filed a Freedom of Information Act request with the Federal Railroad Administration in Washington, D.C.

In its March 13 request, Scripps asked for copies of the applications All Aboard Florida – Operations LLC submitted for Railroad Rehabilitation Improvement Financing loan(s) to provide new intercity passenger rail service.

After seven phone calls and two emails, Scripps received the documents in the mail Aug. 25.

Most financial information was redacted.

FRA counsel William R. Fashouer said the redactions were allowed under law related to trade secrets. AAF was given an opportunity to submit potentially identifiable material and the FRA made an independent determination whether those were allowable under the law, Fashouer said.

AMTRAK
Home
VOX (IL) - After 8 months, the deadly Amtrak crash is still a mystery — but here are 2 theories
January 26, 2016
Libby Nelson

One of the scariest things about the Amtrak crash that killed eight people in May 2015 is that its cause is still mostly a mystery.

As Matthew Shaer reports in a thorough, long article for the New York Times Magazine, when Amtrak 188 derailed in Philadelphia on May 12, the engineer, Brandon Bostian, had no alcohol or drugs in his system; he wasn't looking at his phone; and he was, by all accounts, totally devoted to his job.

Shaer, after talking to rail officials, comes up with two theories to explain why Bostian lost control of the train, entering a dangerous curve at 106 miles per hour:

1. The train's locomotive was hit by a rock. This wasn't an uncommon occurrence on this stretch of track, and happened to other trains that night. Bostian could have hit his head ducking to avoid it, causing him to briefly lose his bearings while the train was accelerating. Bostian had an injury to his forehead, and the train had a dent in its windshield that could have been caused by a projectile.
2. Bostian confused Frankford Junction, the sharp curve where the train derailed, with the curve before it, the way a driver might become confused on a dark highway. He was on his second trip of the day and, due to mechanical problems on his earlier trip, had almost no break between the two.
The article, which is worth reading in full, suggests other contributing factors but concludes that the ultimate cause of the crash is still uncertain. A report expected later today from the National Transportation Safety Board might offer more definitive answers.

Go deeper:

* The Amtrak crash was totally preventable through a technology known as positive train control, now in place on most of the Northeast Corridor.
* A survivor argues that Amtrak's response to the passengers was disastrous.

Effingham Daily News (IL) - Amtrak cuts proposed by governor fail to materialize
January 26, 2016
Stan Polanski

Gov. Bruce Rauner last spring proposed a 40 percent cut to Amtrak funding that threatened to end two lines running through Effingham. But the lines are still operating.

Amtrak has not reduced service and does not plan to, according to a company spokesman.

"We're operating at the same level of service as we were before," said Marc Magliari, media relations manager for Amtrak.

Despite the state's budget impasse and the original plan to trim Amtrak's budget, the national railroad company hasn't had any funding cuts, according to a state official.

In May, a group of Illinois university officials and mayors told a senate committee that the proposed 40 percent would hurt businesses and students.
Riders around Effingham voiced their frustration as well.

"It’s cheaper than driving,” Penny Lycan of Sullivan told the Effingham Daily News in April. She said she relies on the two lines that were in jeopardy of being shut down to visit her daughter. “Just raise the ticket prices because it would still be more affordable. Don’t get rid of the service.”

Amtrak may have avoided cuts so far, but some warn that future funding for the railway remains uncertain.

Richard Harnish, executive director for the Midwest High Speed Rail Association, an advocacy group, said that cuts could come in Amtrak's budget for the 2017 fiscal year.

"Nothing really happened," Harnish said, referring to the proposed cuts for the 2016 fiscal year. "But nothing has been decided either. As the budget moves forward, there's still a question in 2017.

"People need to convey to Springfield that they want the service to expand," Harnish said.

The Hill - Amtrak to test restoration of rail service lost since Katrina
January 26, 2016
Keith Laing

Amtrak is planning to test the feasibility of restoring rail service on the Gulf Coast between New Orleans and Florida that has been dormant since Hurricane Katrina 10 years ago. 

Trains on Amtrak's Sunset Limited route, which used to run between Los Angeles and Orlando, have ended in New Orleans since the 2005 storm, which wiped out tracks along the Gulf of Mexico. 

Amtrak is planning to operate a test train on the route, which includes stops in Alabama and the panhandle of Florida before it heads south to Orlando, to examine the feasibility of restoring the service, the company announced this week. The train will run from New Orleans to Orlando on Feb. 18-19 with Amtrak leaders and elected officials, according to the report. 

Amtrak officials said "the goal of the invitation-only trip is to examine the existing CSX railroad infrastructure and to better understand rail’s economic, cultural and mobility opportunities." 
“We want to work with community leaders and CSX," Amtrak CEO Joe Boardman said in a statement. “Additional regional economic development can come from shared infrastructure investments on a timeline to better connect the region to the rest of the country and more than 500 other Amtrak destinations.”

A recently completed study showed restoring the rail service between Louisiana and Central Florida would attract between 138,300 and 153,900 passengers annually.

The study, conducted by Amtrak for the Southern Rail Commission, also showed it would cost $5.48 million to operate a daily roundtrip train on the shuttered Gulf Coast route if states chip in under a 2008 law that allows Amtrak to contract with local governments to provide increased service on shorter routes.

The cost would rise to $9.49 million if additional service if instituted between New Orleans and Mobile, Ala., under the proposal.  

Other options that were studied include operating two daily trips from New Orleans to only Mobile, with bus connections from there to existing Amtrak service in Jacksonville, Fla., and operating the one daily New Orleans-to-Florida trip under Amtrak's long-distance route structure.

The study said the long-distance proposal would attract 69,100 passengers and cost $14.4 million per year to operate.

Advocates of restoring the dormant Gulf Coast rail service have been hoping to convince Amtrak of the feasibility of the route since a provision authorizing the study was included in a highway funding bill that was passed by Congress last year. 

"The Gulf Coast region is home to numerous regional, national and global tourist destinations and events, including New Orleans’ Mardi Gras, the theme parks of central Florida, Gulf Coast beaches and casino gaming/resorts," the authors of the feasibility study wrote in the begging of their report. 

"Major league sports teams, NCAA bowl games, three cruise terminals with weekly mass-market cruise ship departures and convention opportunities also draw visitors to communities in the region, while military bases and major defense contractor facilities bring business and military travelers," the report continued. "Reintroduction of rail passenger service to this market presents numerous marketing opportunities and Amtrak has the marketing capability to assist in promoting any service which is implemented." 

The 1,995-mile Sunset Limited is one of Amtrak's national, or long-distance, trains, which have been dubbed money-losers by critics for years. The truncated route between Los Angeles and New Orleans carried 105,000 passengers in the 2014 fiscal year, the lowest total of any long-distance Amtrak service, according to figures released by the company.  

Amtrak supporters have defended the losses on national routes such as Sunset Limited by arguing that subsidizing long-distance trains in parts of the country with little air service is a big part of the reason Congress created the company in the first place.

STATE BY STATE
Home
The State Journal (IL) - Archaeological site latest question mark for 10th Street rail consolidation plan
January 26, 2016
Tim Landis

Union Pacific railroad has decided that bypassing an archaeological site uncovered during rail-consolidation construction in Springfield is not feasible, raising more questions about long-term plans to combine local train traffic on a single corridor.

The company, based in Omaha, Nebraska, released a one-sentence statement Tuesday in response to questions about the site near Carpenter Street underpass construction on the 10th Street rail corridor.

"We have worked with the city's consultant and offered multiple concessions in the design," said the statement from Union Pacific. "However, this is an exception to our requirements we are unable to make."

During excavation required by federal-funding rules for identifying historic properties along the route, researchers uncovered the foundations of seven homes and other artifacts from an immigrant neighborhood of the mid-1800s, including homes later destroyed during the Springfield Race Riot of 1908.
While Union Pacific's decision appears to have no immediate effect on rail consolidation -- there is no funding yet for the next phase of construction -- the Federal Railroad Administration is reviewing the site for possible inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.

"FRA has not made any decisions regarding possible modifications to the 10th Street project's footprint or what mitigation might be required to address impacts to the archaeological site," agency spokesman Matthew Lehner said in an email prior to the Union Pacific announcement.

The site is in the right-of-way for a second set of tracks that would eventually be required to move Union Pacific and Amtrak trains from the Third Street rail corridor to 10th Street.

Federal railroad officials also sent a letter last week notifying 43 members of a local advisory group of business, elected, community and religious leaders that no decisions had yet been made with regard to the site.

Workers have placed a protective cover over the artifacts on the west edge of the 10th Street tracks, just east of HSHS St. John's Hospital, pending a decision on the site's historic status.

Executive director Shelly Heideman of the Faith Coalition for the Common Good said federal rail officials advised the group this week that other work could continue, including completion of the Carpenter Street underpass, while the future of the archaeological find is decided. The coalition of religious and community leaders is among organizations pushing for protection of a site linked to one of the most traumatic events in city history.

"They way we understand it, it's not their (Union Pacific's) decision," Heideman said Tuesday.

The coalition, she said, was among members of the advisory group that sent a letter to the company asking that the second set of tracks be moved farther east, away from the historic dig.

"We got no response from them," said Heideman, who added that the next step is uncertain. "We'll just have to see."

Construction of the Carpenter Street underpass, between Ninth and 11th streets, is scheduled for completion this summer at an estimated cost of $20 million. The city and county are seeking federal funds for two more underpasses at Ash and at Laurel streets after failing to win $16 million in a round of federal-transportation grants announced in October.

Kevin Seals, an environmental engineer with rail-consolidation consulting firm Hanson Professional Services of Springfield, said the federal analysis of the archaeological site will not affect planning for underpasses at Ash and Laurel.

An archaeological site with ties to the Springfield Race Riot of 1908 was uncovered during preparation for construction of a railroad underpass at Carpenter Street between Ninth and 11th streets.

The excavation revealed foundations of seven homes from an immigrant neighborhood of the mid-1800s, as well as glassware, dishes, cisterns and other artifacts. Five of the homes were said to have been destroyed in the race riot, when white mobs damaged black-owned homes and businesses during a two-day rampage sparked by criminal accusations against two local black men.

A protective cover has been placed over the site along the 10th Street tracks, just east of HSHS St. John's Hospital, pending a Federal Railroad Administration decision on the site's historic status.




3


