 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 29, 2016
TV & RADIO
FRA investigating Tri Rail derailment in Pompano Beach	2
Representative Kind introduces rail safety legislation on the heels of CP derailment	2
U.S. Senator Capito weighs in on NS - CP merger	2
Video shows Sun Rail head-on collision with a car in Sanford	2
PTC
North Bay Business Journal (CA) - SMART rolls out operations center, safety campaign	2
RAIL INCIDENTS
Winona Daily News (MN) - Crews find sheen in Mississippi River at derailment site	5
LaCrosse Tribune (MN) - Railroad: 850 gallons of vegetable oil released in Brownsville derailment	7
MLive (MI) - Victim of fatal Amtrak-car crash identified by police	8
CROSSING NEWS
WRAL (NC) - Residents say CSX off-track in decision to close Apex, Cary rail crossings at same time	8
HIGH SPEED RAIL
Los Angeles Times - Bullet train may take longer to build but cost less than originally estimated, official says	10
FAST ACT
Engineering News Record (MI) - Mayors Cheer FAST Act Aid for Urban Projects	12
STATE BY STATE
The Baltimore Sun - Maryland Department of Transportation supports option of two Laurel train stops	13
Sun Sentinel (FL) - Tri-Rail expects 'minor delays' today following Thursday's derailed train	14
WEAU (WI) - Rail Safety Act seeks to increase rail safety and proctect communities	16


TV & RADIO
Home
FRA investigating Tri Rail derailment in Pompano Beach
WSVN-MIA (FOX) - Miami, FL

Representative Kind introduces rail safety legislation on the heels of CP derailment 
WEAU (NBC) - La Crosse, WI

U.S. Senator Capito weighs in on NS - CP merger
WVVA (NBC) - Bluefield, WV

Video shows Sun Rail head-on collision with a car in Sanford
CW18 WKCF - Orlando, FL

PTC
Home
North Bay Business Journal (CA) - SMART rolls out operations center, safety campaign
January 28, 2016
Gary Quackenbush

SANTA ROSA — Sonoma–Marin Area Rail Transit, or SMART, gave a first look at what will be the nerve center for the forthcoming line as well as safety features, chiefly a new-to-passenger-rail system designed to prevent the kind of large-scale disasters that grabbed national headlines six months ago.

Unveiled was the recently completed Rail Operations Center, or ROC, located where the tracks cross Airport Boulevard. The Jan. 27 media tour was part of a safety-awareness campaign ahead of regular service starting, scheduled for late fall.

The SMART train will be among the first passenger rail lines in the U.S. to deploy positive train control, or PTC, officials for the line said. Such a system monitors the track ahead and train speed giving the operations center the option of transmitting a speed-override signal to prevent derailments, accidents and injuries. The national rail network was supposed to have PTC by Dec. 15 under the Railroad Safety Improvement Act of 2008.

However, few rail systems had implemented PTC before a fatal Amtrak train crash in Philadelphia last May focused attention of the problem. That line didn’t have PTC, and the train was traveling at more than 100 miles an hour, twice the acceptable speed when approaching a curve.

Part of the Jan. 27 facility tour included the test run of a SMART self-powered traincar. Passengers commented that the ride was smooth and comfortable, as the welded rail joints eliminated the familiar clickety-clack sound and vibration.

SMART (SonomaMarinTrain.org) will start with 14 cars, initially configured in seven type A and B pairs, or trainsets. Type A cars have restrooms, while type B cars have a snack and refreshment center. Each car has hooks for 12 bicycles and spaces for wheelchair lockdowns. Seats recline when not next to bulkheads, and there are some seats with tables. WiFi and power connections are also provided.

Large windows on each side of the cars provide wide views of the passing landscape and brighten the roomy car interiors. Three-car trainsets are planned, once the line is running and passenger volumes increase.

Each SMART train will have a crew of two: one operator (driver) and a “conductor” who will circulate through each car to check for tickets or cite those who did not purchase a Clipper fare card in advance before boarding. Clipper (clippercard.com) is accepted by a number of Bay Area transit systems.

Other safety features are 12 exits from each car, four through doorways and eight through emergency-exit windows. There are no ceiling-hanging grips, but aisle-facing handles are provided on each seat to help steady those standing.

The operations center, built at a cost of $18 million, is a 19,200-square-foot structure over three stories high. It can maintain, commission and test several train cars simultaneously. The main floor has an 8-foot-deep pit for undercarriage work that runs the length of two cars. Each car weighs 150,000 pounds and is powered by 760-horsepower engine, which a mobile 15-ton-capacity overhead crane can remove and replace.

Adjacent to the building are several railroad sidings for trains not in service that can be easily switched into the main line.

A SMART passenger station will be built adjacent to the operations center, but the number of parking spaces available has not yet been determined.

Local and Bay Area contractors involved in the building of the ROC include Shimmick Construction, general contractor; Ghilotti Construction Company, site preparation, grading and paving; Ahlborn Fence and Steel, fencing and metals; Engelke, sitework for rails; Devincenzi Concrete, installation; and Shamrock Materials, concrete.

KEEPING TRACKS CLEAR

Train system integration testing program, which involves the sound of train whistles at crossings and along the tracks in “Zone A” between Santa Rosa and the ROC, will continue through June. Zone A is the first section of track with trains now operating at test speeds of 30, 40 and 50 mph.

The next phase, set to run until fall, will include simulated service on a train operating on schedule from Santa Rosa to downtown San Rafael. In long stretches of track between stations, the top speed will be 79 mph.

“Everyone should realize that this is now an active railroad,” said Matt Stevens, community outreach specialist. “The last passenger train in the North Bay discontinued service in 1958, and generations of children have grown up without learning how to be safe around tracks and trains. In recent years, there have been infrequent freight trains on the track right of way that has been refurbished for SMART use.”

With maintenance vehicles, passenger trains and, north of Novato, freight trains running on the line at various times, SMART is focusing on building community awareness of train safety as a significant issue. The campaign slogan is, “Pay Attention, Be Prepared and Stay Safe.”

In a briefing led by SMART Police Chief Jennifer Welch and Stevens, discussed safety tips for elementary/secondary students and parents and expressed deep concern about homeless people on or near the tracks as well as garbage and fencing.

Welch said SMART is working with Santa Rosa police and Catholic Charities to find places to care for homeless people who are by or near the tracks.

“It’s a challenge to keep the rail right of way clear and safe,” Welch said.

A 90-day notice period required to give the homeless camped along the tracks ample time to vacate has only been issued in Santa Rosa and San Rafael, she said.

This notice has not been given to those in other communities along the initial operating route as yet. She said regulations are also being developed for gambling on trains, smoking and e-cigarettes as well as pets (other than service dogs).

Recommended safety tips for pedestrians on foot or bicycle and for drivers are:

• The only safe place to cross the railroad tracks is at a designated public crossing where there are crossbuck gates, signal lights and bells.

• Never stop a car on a railroad crossing. Stop 15 feet back at the white line.

• If you car stalls on the tracks, get out, help any children out, run away from the tracks and call 9-1-1. If gates are down and you think they shouldn’t be, call 9-1-1.

• Never try to race a train to cross the tracks or drive around lowered gates. Red lights at railroad crossings start flashing when the train is still far away. Trains move faster than you can see at a distance and can take 1 mile to stop.

• Tracks are for trains, not for games. Tracks, trestles, rail yards and equipment are private property, so it is illegal to walk, jog or bike on railroad property other than at a public crossing. Violators are subject to fines and endanger their lives and others.

• Never take shortcuts across the tracks. Cross only at designated railroad crossings.

• Bike wheels can get caught between rails, so always cross at a 90-degree angle. If possible, walk — don’t ride — across tracks. It is never safe or legal to bike on railroad property.

SMART is working with Operation Lifesaver, a national nonprofit dedicated to railroad safety education. Schools can request a free rail safety presentation via “Request a Presentation” on the California Operation Lifesaver website (www.caol.us). Other safety tips can be found at www.BeTrackSMART.org.

In other SMART news, Jeanne Mariani-Belding was hired as marketing and communications manager and is tasked with launching a new advertising campaign based on recent ridership studies.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Winona Daily News (MN) - Crews find sheen in Mississippi River at derailment site
January 28, 2016
Chris Hubbuch

BROWNSVILLE, Minn. — A Canadian Pacific freight train derailed Tuesday night in Houston County, Minn., sending six cars into the Mississippi River and spilling food-grade oil into the water.

The southbound train derailed around 10 p.m. about three miles south of Brownsville. There were no injuries reported.

CP spokesman Andy Cummings said a small amount of sodium chlorate powder spilled from one of the 15 derailed cars but none of the chemical reached the river.

Primarily used in a bleaching agent for the pulp and paper industry, sodium chlorate can cause fire or explosions when mixed with other materials, according to the manufacturer.

It could kill algae and other aquatic plants if spilled into the river, said Mark Sandheinrich, a professor of biology and director of the River Studies Center at the University of Wisconsin-La Crosse.

CP has not said what other materials the mixed-freight train was carrying.

Dozens of contractors and government officials were on the scene Wednesday removing overturned cars and repairing the damaged track.

Crews were cutting through ice to install wooden barriers downstream after discovering a sheen consistent with soybean oil, according to the railroad. CP said Monday afternoon that it planned to empty the tanker cars before pulling them from the river.

“Canadian Pacific takes this incident extremely seriously,” Cummings said. “Safety will be our top priority.”

The railroad said it anticipated the line, which carries about six trains per day, would reopen Wednesday night. Removal of the oil tankers depends on how quickly it could get empty cars to the site to hold the oil.

The Federal Railroad Administration had inspectors on the scene, though it could take months to determine a cause, said deputy regional administrator Michael Bodah.

The Environmental Protection Agency, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Coast Guard and Mississippi River Basin Association were also at the site.

Sabrina Chandler, refuge manager for the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge, said oil can coat fish and mussels, preventing them from absorbing oxygen.

“We always have a concern if there’s anything going in the river that’s not supposed to be there,” Chandler said.

The derailment occurred under a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service overlook that is a popular spot for watching tundra swans and other migratory birds. Chandler said it wasn’t clear what impact the activity might have on future migrations but noted the oil itself would not pose a risk.

“It’s certainly not the same situation as if it was crude oil,” Chandler said.

Canadian Pacific had two derailments in Minnesota during 2015, according to the FRA’s accident database, which includes incidents through the end of October. Both occurred at relatively slow speeds and did not result in major damages or hazardous material spills.

About 31,000 gallons of liquid fertilizer and an unknown amount of diesel fuel leaked into the Mississippi River when two CP trains collided in 2008 near Dresbach, Minn.

Railroads have come under increased scrutiny in recent years with the rapid growth of crude oil shipments. According to the latest available reports, an average of nine trains per week run on the CP line through Houston County carrying more than a million gallons of crude. Most cross the Mississippi River at La Crescent, continuing east through La Crosse County.

Last year the railroad launched four projects on its southeastern Minnesota line, including a bridge replacement and new sidings to allow trains to pass on the Marquette line, which continues south through Iowa and west to Kansas City.

A CP train carrying crude oil derailed Nov. 8 in Watertown, Wis., one day after a BNSF train derailed near Alma, Wis., spilling ethanol into the Mississippi River. No injuries were reported in either of those accidents.

Citizens Acting for Rail Safety issued a statement Tuesday saying the derailment “brings to light the potential for serious accidents that can cause disastrous consequences to our communities and environment.” The rail safety group noted that hazardous materials besides oil and ethanol traverse the area daily.

LaCrosse Tribune (MN) - Railroad: 850 gallons of vegetable oil released in Brownsville derailment
January 28, 2016
Chris Hubbuch

The Canadian Pacific has repaired track damaged in Tuesday’s derailment in southern Minnesota and removed vegetable oil from three tank cars that remained submerged in the Mississippi River Thursday.

The railroad reopened the line running south from La Crescent into Iowa around 4:30 a.m. Thursday, a little more than 30 hours since 15 cars of a freight train derailed, sending six tank cars into the river.

After finding a sheen on the water Wednesday, crews sealed damaged valves on two of the tank cars, which were carrying soybean oil. One of the three tankers emptied Thursday was estimated to have leaked about 850 gallons into the river, according to CP spokesman Andy Cummings.

Cummings said there was no evidence of additional leakage, and barriers have been placed downstream of the submerged tankers to contain any spilled oil.

CP planned to unload the other three tank cars Friday. Once emptied the cars will be pulled from the river.

The railroad also plans to unload material from the other derailed cars, including sodium chlorate. A small amount of the hazardous material spilled during the derailment but did not reach the river, according to CP.

Cummings said cleanup crews would likely be on scene through the weekend.

Traffic on Hwy. 26 remained limited to one lane while the dozens of contractors and other responders work to clear the scene, which is about three miles south of Brownsville at a U.S. Fish and Wildlife overlook.

Cummings said train traffic is flowing intermittently on the line, which typically sees about six trains per day.

The Federal Railroad Administration had inspectors on the scene, though it could take months to determine a cause, said deputy regional administrator Michael Bodah.

The Environmental Protection Agency, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Coast Guard and Mississippi River Basin Association are also at the site.

Though it’s not considered a hazardous material, vegetable oil can coat aquatic animals and prevent them from absorbing oxygen, said Sabrina Chandler, refuge manager for the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge.

MLive (MI) - Victim of fatal Amtrak-car crash identified by police
January 28, 2016
Ryan Shek

RASS LAKE, MI – The victim of a fatal Amtrak-car crash in Jackson County has been identified as a 53-year-old man from Ann Arbor. 

Eric Foote died Wednesday, Jan. 27, after an Amtrak passenger train struck his Ford sedan at E. Michigan Avenue and Willis Road in Grass Lake Charter Township, a statement released by the Jackson County Sherriff's Office said.

Initial information suggests Foote, who was heading south on Willis Road at around 12:56 p.m., disregarded the warning signal, crossed the tracks and was struck by the westbound train, a statement from the sheriff's office reads.

Four Amtrak workers witnessed the crash and said the train's audible signal and crossing arms at E. Michigan Avenue and Willis Road were working, according to the sheriff's office.

Foote was the sedan's only occupant, while no passengers in the Amtrak train were hurt, according to the sheriff's office. 

E. Michigan Avenue, which closed at Willis road, reopened roughly three hours after the crash, while debris could be seen scattered across the half-mile of closed roadway.

CROSSING NEWS
Home
WRAL (NC) - Residents say CSX off-track in decision to close Apex, Cary rail crossings at same time
January 28, 2016
Julia Sims

Residents in Apex and Cary are fuming over a maintenance project to a rail line that runs through both towns that has closed more than half a dozen crossings simultaneously this week.

CSX is replacing old rail ties and repaving the crossings for a smoother ride for drivers, but the closures have been anything but smooth for some.

"It was a nightmare," Cary resident Melvin Matthews said of the resulting gridlock.

Pleasant Plains Road is the only way in and out of the Kirkwood Subdivision in Apex, but it was closed off Tuesday and Wednesday so CSX crews could work.

"We were landlocked for practically all of two days," Tony Santitoro said of the 40 or so homes in the neighborhood.

Santitoro said his mother had to miss two days of physical therapy for her broken back.

"We tried ahead of time to contact CSX to let them know what our issues were, but it just turned into a two-day disaster," he said.

Some residents called the multiple closures a public safety issue, questioning whether it would delay fire trucks or ambulances in an emergency.

"If it was an emergency repair, it would be more understandable. This is a maintenance repair. There's no justification to close that many intersections in the same jurisdiction at one time," Matthews said.

Apex officials were able to station police at key intersections by Thursday to limit traffic snarls and ensure emergency vehicles could get where they are needed, Mayor Lance Olive said.

Olive said the biggest complaint he's heard from residents has been about the lack of advanced notice of the closures. The town typically likes to give residents a one- to two-week heads-up for a project of this magnitude.

"We understand they have full authority on the railroad and railway but want them to recognize that they are an integrated part of our community," Olive said. "We’d like to work together for common purposes, and there are citizens impacted by their decision, and (we) want to make sure they are well-informed."

A CSX spokeswoman apologized for the inconvenience and any miscommunication about notifications of the work, but she said the maintenance is necessary.

"Maintaining railroad infrastructure is critical to avoiding service disruptions and preventing accidents and injuries," Kristin Seay said in an email to WRAL News.

Seay said the crossings at Laura Duncan Road and Center Street should reopen Friday, weather permitting, while work should be done on the Tingen Road crossing by Saturday, on the East Chatham Street crossing in Apex by next Tuesday and on the Friendship Road crossing by next Wednesday.

More closures are planned next week, however. The crossing on SW Maynard Road is expected to be closed Monday and Tuesday; Bosco Road in New Hill on Tuesday and Wednesday; Mason Road in New Hill on Wednesday and Thursday; and New Hill Road on Thursday and Friday.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
Los Angeles Times - Bullet train may take longer to build but cost less than originally estimated, official says
January 28, 2016
Ralph Vartabedian

California's bullet train could take longer to build than previously estimated and its ultimate cost is difficult to predict, the head of the high-speed rail authority told state legislators Wednesday.

"It may take us a little longer than we said to do this," rail authority Chairman Dan Richard said in testimony to an Assembly transportation committee. He did not elaborate.

But Richard also said that a forthcoming update of its business plan for the high-speed link between Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area will show a reduction in the estimated cost of $68 billion, despite delays that have slowed construction.

The project is more than two years behind the schedule the authority announced in 2012, when it expected to start building 29 miles of rail structures. The work began in July and remains at a slow pace.

The oversight hearing was called by Assemblyman Richard Bloom (D-Santa Monica), who described the bullet train as "one of the most complex projects not only in the state but in the nation's history."

Bloom said construction of the rail system will be difficult and full of risks. In a brief interview after the 90-minute hearing, he said he believed the project "is being managed well."

The hearing was limited to testimony from three officials, two of whom work for the authority and a third who is chairman of a peer review panel.

In a public comment period after the testimony, a series of speakers sharply criticized the project, but their remarks were limited to one minute apiece.

Assemblywoman Patty Lopez (D-San Fernando), who was among those in the public comment line, said she had asked rail authority officials to work with her on some of the effects of the project on her working-class community but did not receive any response.

Other objections were raised by the Train Riders Assn. of California, farmers and other rural residents. Two labor union officials praised the project.

Richard and state rail authority Chief Executive Jeff Morales spent much of their testimony during the hearing attacking an October 2015 Times story that concluded that the state was highly unlikely to complete an initial operating segment from Burbank to Merced by its 2022 deadline or to bring the project in on budget.

The Times found that the years remaining before the deadline were not enough to construct 300 miles of track, bore 36 miles of mountain tunnels, build six train stations, erect high-voltage electrical systems and construct a heavy maintenance facility. The story was based on comments by tunnel engineers, construction experts and geologists.

The story also reported that the agency's primary consultant, Parsons Brinckerhoff, had submitted a cost estimate in October 2013 that projected a 31% increase in the cost of the initial construction segment and a 5% increase in the cost of the full 500-mile system. The estimate, which was the culmination of a two-year effort by a team of engineers, was not used when the state issued its 2014 business plan several months later.

Morales told lawmakers the Parsons Brinckerhoff estimate was just a draft, subject to revision and among other analyses used for the official cost estimate that was made public. A large number of the rail agency's reports and documents are marked "draft" in large letters, including the written testimony that Richard and Morales read from a witness table at Wednesday's hearing.

"They are hiding behind the draft stamp," Assemblyman Jim Patterson (R-Fresno) said after the hearing.

Morales testified that part of the $9-billion increase reported by The Times was based on construction of more miles of track and longer viaducts, an explanation he did not provide in an interview before the story was published.

The full documentation behind the Parsons Brinckerhoff cost estimate has yet to be disclosed. The rail authority had refused to provide the estimate, which was contained in a detailed PowerPoint presentation, under the Public Records Act. The Times subsequently obtained the document from an individual close to the project.

Richard also told the committee that The Times had refused to interview the rail agency's own tunneling experts.

In fact, The Times made a request to interview the authority's tunnel engineers. Lisa Marie Alley, who was then the press secretary, offered an interview with Lombardi, an Italian subcontractor, and also asked that The Times speak with an outside expert, Anthony Cording.

In a July 23, 2015, email, The Times wrote that it would be "happy to talk to the Lombardi people and Cording."

The authority subsequently withdrew the offer for the Lombardi interview. The Times independently contacted Cording, who declined to comment publicly.

The Times did speak to three of the world's foremost tunneling experts, none of whom are affiliated with the project. They were highly skeptical the tunnels could be bored by the 2022 deadline.

Patterson asked Richard whether, as The Times reported Sunday, the rail authority was rethinking its plan to build the first segment between Burbank and Merced. The Times said the authority was considering a plan to build instead from the Bay Area south — a change that would avoid the difficult tunneling of the southern route until much of the system had been completed.

Richard did not elaborate on what the authority is considering. He said, "Nobody is going to be left behind no matter what we do."

Patterson said testimony by Richard and Morales was ambiguous, adding, "The interest here was to have a show hearing."

Louis Thompson, chairman of a peer review panel that was mandated under state law, also testified Wednesday, suggesting the project should have significantly closer oversight by a well-funded and long-term branch of the state government.

FAST ACT
Home
Engineering News Record (MI) - Mayors Cheer FAST Act Aid for Urban Projects
January 28, 2016
Tom Ichniowski

Underfunded infrastructure is U.S. mayors’ “most pressing problem,” according to a new survey. But mayors will be getting some significant help from the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act to narrow the funding gap.

Nearly half the officials who responded to the 2015 Menino Survey of Mayors, released on Jan. 20, cited infrastructure as their biggest challenge over the next five years or more—for issues that are primarily state or federal responsibilities. No other topic got more than 20% of the responses to the survey by the U.S. Conference of Mayors and the Boston University Initiative on Cities.

The long-delayed FAST Act, signed on Dec. 4, authorizes $305 billion for highway, transit and rail programs over five years. The new law boosts funding from 2015 levels, and its multiyear authorizations should give cities, states and construction firms more assurance to carry out long-term projects.

Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx on Jan. 21 drew applause from attendees at the U.S. Conference of Mayors winter meeting when he said, “Lo and behold, we’ve got a five-year transportation bill.” Foxx, a former mayor of Charlotte, N.C., added, “Now we have to take the plans that we have and actually get them done. And I would urge you not to waste any time.”

Foxx alerted mayors that DOT will issue a funding-availability notice in the first quarter of 2016 for a major FAST Act initiative, a $4.5-billion, five-year competitive grant program for “nationally significant freight and highway projects.” Cities are among those eligible to apply for the grants.

Mayors also were happy that transit did so well in the FAST Act. Minneapolis Mayor Betsy Hodges (D) noted that transit funding rises 10% in the statute’s first year, fiscal 2016, and its percentage gains in the law’s last four years are higher than highways’ increases.

Cities scored another FAST Act victory in a provision that raises localities’ 50% share of federal Surface Transportation Program (STP) funds by one percentage point a year, topping out at 55% in 2020. Austin Mayor Steve Adler (D) said, “It’s a step in the right direction, and we need more.” The mayors’ conference says the law will provide localities almost $3.4 billion in added STP funds over five years.

Beyond the FAST Act, Foxx said that, later this year, DOT will seek applications for a new, $500-million round of its hotly competitive Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery grants, funded in the 2016 omnibus appropriations law.

Initial applications are due on Feb. 4 for DOT’s “Smart City Challenge,” which seeks to encourage cities to develop plans “for integrating tech-savvy, forward- looking transportation networks,” Foxx said. The winner would get up to $40 million from DOT and $10 million from Seattle investment firm Vulcan Inc.

STATE BY STATE
Home
The Baltimore Sun - Maryland Department of Transportation supports option of two Laurel train stops
January 28, 2016
Andrew Michaels

Nearly eight months after the Laurel City Council began the "Save Our Stop" movement to keep Laurel's historic train station operating as a MARC stop, the city has gained an ally in Maryland Department of Transportation Secretary Pete Rahn, who has voiced the department's support of "double stops" in Laurel.

The MARC train transports passengers between Baltimore and Washington, making a stop at the downtown Laurel station, located in Prince George's County. City officials said two stops would allow the Main Street MARC stop to stay put, with another stop 2,500 feet away, adjacent to the race track at the proposed Laurel Park development in Howard County.

While freight transportation company CSX owns the tracks, the MARC train is operated by the Maryland Transit Administration.

Despite the good news, City Council President Ed Ricks said "relief is still not there," as CSX previously disagreed with the Maryland Department of Transportation double stop option because of disruptions to its operations.

"I will find other ways to stress to CSX the importance of realizing they have an obligation to provide transportation to Laurel residents," Ricks said. "If I have to, I will reach out to the mayor of Baltimore and Washington and I will seek their assistance."

However, Ricks said he still considers Rahn's support a victory for the city.

The city also received some support from Howard County Executive Allan Kittleman last month, when Ricks and Kittleman sent a joint letter to Brain Hammock, CSX vice president of government affairs, detailing how maintaining two train stops was necessary for both Howard County and Laurel. Ricks credits Howard County's support for the two-stop option as leading to the state also climbing on board.

"This has been a hot topic and we have never stopped for one minute, trying to breath life into our station and make sure it stays there," Ricks said.

Ricks said Laurel residents joined in to save the stop after city officials learned that the Stronach Group, owners of Laurel Park racetrack, submitted plans for a development next to the existing Laurel Park flag-stop platform in Howard County. Those plans called for making the flag stop into a full-service stop and eliminating the current MARC stop.

"We have made every effort possible," Ricks said. "I think when Howard County and the city came together to show the state what the potential was, so they had no other decision than to go and join with us in the effort to convince CSX to support the two stops."

Ricks said conversations with CSX will continue, now with the Maryland Department of Transportation on the city's side.

Sun Sentinel (FL) - Tri-Rail expects 'minor delays' today following Thursday's derailed train
January 28, 2016
Erika Pesantes and Adam Sacasa

Tri-Rail commuters should continue to expect delays Friday as crews fix tracks damaged by a derailed train just north of McNab Road.

One person was injured when the northbound train ran off course after striking debris early Thursday. What the debris was and where it came from was not known.

Early Friday, a Tri-Rail notice said "passengers can expect minor delays throughout today's commute," due to Thursday's accident.

Bus bridges for passengers between the Cypress Creek and Pompano Beach stations are continuing. The derailment happened on the tracks between those two stations.

Northbound trains weren't traveling any farther than the Cypress Creek station while southbound trains were not traveling farther south than the Pompano Beach station, Arnold said.

The incident was reported at 5:20 a.m. Thursday and sparked a multi-jurisdictional response from agencies including Pompano Beach Fire Rescue, Fort Lauderdale Fire Rescue and the Broward Sheriff's Office.

First responders found a small fire in the engine and about 2,200 gallons of spilled diesel fuel, said Capt. Greg May, of Fort Lauderdale Fire Rescue.

Fifty-six people were evacuated from the train of six cars and two locomotives. One person had minor injuries and was treated at Broward Health Imperial Point, officials said.

Passengers boarded a bus at the scene and were taken to the Tri-Rail station in Pompano Beach to continue their trips.

Nesar Khan, 24, of West Palm Beach, had already dealt with storms in Louisiana on what he described as a "hectic and crazy" flight Wednesday, only to have the commotion continue Thursday as the train he was heading home on went off course.

"It was a wild ride," Khan said about his flight, "I got over that and then I come into this."

Khan described a "big bang noise" and the lights shutting off as the train derailed — and then he spotted a small fire.

"The train basically just slowly shut down," he said.

Edwin Bonilla, 57, of Hollywood, made it off the derailed train and said rescue personnel were asking passengers if they were OK. He had arranged for his boss to pick him up so he could make it to his destination in Deerfield Beach.

"It was a crazy morning so far," Bonilla said.

According to Tri-Rail spokeswoman Bonnie Arnold, the crew reported striking debris before the derailment that caused substantial damage to a railroad track. However, a Tri-Rail train about 15 minutes prior to the accident and a 2:45 a.m. freight train had no problems on the tracks while heading south, she said.

Officials would have to assess the damage on the train tracks and do repair work before hoisting the train back on, Arnold said. It was not yet known whether any of the tracks could resume operation while repairs are underway Friday.

The delays frustrated passengers. Eddie Cody, 24, of Miami, was traveling to Delray Beach on a train behind the derailed one and had to be bussed to the Pompano Beach station.

"I'm going to be super late to work. It's really going to affect my paycheck," he said.

The service interruption also affected Amtrak service and freight train travel.

Earlier this month, a Tri-Rail train car derailed near the Lake Worth station after colliding with a garbage truck. It, too, was an early morning accident, occurring after 6:45 a.m. on Jan. 4.

More than 20 passengers were treated for injuries in that case.

On a regular weekday, about 15,000 commuters use Tri-Rail service, Arnold said.


WEAU (WI) - Rail Safety Act seeks to increase rail safety and proctect communities
January 28, 2016

Democratic Representative Ron Kind is proposing legislation to increase rail safety and better protect our communities in the event of a trail derailment.

Rep. Kind said the proposed legislation would direct FEMA to coordinate with the Department of Transportation to provide emergency response equipment in strategic places along rail lines where high volume, high-hazard trains operate.

Kind said this would give emergency responders the equipment they need to respond more effectively to a derailment.

He was in Whitehall Thursday for a listening session and spoke with WEAU 13 News about the proposed Rail Safety Act.

Representative Kind said the legislation would place emergency response equipment in strategic places along heavily traveled rail lines.

"If there's a major derailment that involves highly toxic, highly flammable material, such as the Bakken Oil, our first responders need the resources in which to combat it, especially the foam. That's very crucial for putting that fire out," said Rep. Kind.

Possible equipment to be placed along the rail lines includes firefighting equipment and fire suppression agents, including foam trailers.

"This bill would require FEMA to coordinate with state and local agencies to make sure we're being smart in deploying these resources. resources that quite frankly, already exist. we just need to deploy them more smartly along the highly sensitive routes," said Rep. Kind.

Rep. Kind said the cost of paying for this should not fall on the taxpayers, which is why instead FEMA will be authorized to use fees collected from the rail companies to purchase the equipment.

Mary Richter of Strum attended Thursday's listening session to speak about reducing the speed of trains traveling through Whitehall. She said you never know when a derailment could happen.

"Are you worried about a derailment? That could happen at the speed they're going," said Mary Richter.

Richter said she likes the idea of the Rail Safety Act, but she would also like to see more derailment-related training for emergency responders.

Rep. Kind said if we've learned anything from previous derailments, it's time is of the essence. He believes this legislation
would lower the response time of firefighters.

Representative Kind said the next steps include having the legislation introduced in committee and working with the Federal Railway Administration.

WEAU 13 News also reached out to Republicans, including Representative Sean Duffy and Senator Ron Johnson for their thoughts on this legislation, but we haven't heard back yet.


3


