 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 13, 2016
TV & RADIO
FRA presents plans for NEC in Long Island	2
Amtrak needs $290 Billion to Run through Long Island	2
FRA to hold public hearing on NEC tonight in Hartford	2
CSX and First Responders team up on training	2
WLOX (ABC) - Biloxi, MS	2
One killed when car is struck by train in Odessa	2
Climate change activists on trial for train disruptions	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Associated Press - Canadian Pacific report details its argument for rail merger	2
MHL News - STB Throws Monkey Wrench into Possible CP-NS Merger while Opposition Grows	3
PTC
Buffalo News - Letter: Freight rail industry trying to get PTC installed quickly	5
RAIL INCIDENTS
WLOX (MS) - Train derailment exercise works to improve emergency response	6
Odessa American (TX) - One dead after train-vehicle accident	6
HIGH SPEED RAIL
Newsday (NY) - Federal Railroad Administration officials meet with LI residents on high-speed rail	7
LA Times - Costs rise for moving utility lines in construction of bullet train	8
Associated Press - High-speed rail board OKs bid for rail in Kern County	10
HHFT
The News & Advance (VA) - Crude by rail down, but officials still bracing for danger on tracks	10
AMTRAK
New York Times - How to Transform Penn Station: Move the Garden	12
Long Island News - Feds propose Amtrak route through LI to Boston	15
STATE BY STATE
NorthJersey.com - Labor board decides in favor of NJ Transit workers	15
Philly Mag - FRA Has Plans for a Rail Tunnel Under Center City to the Airport	16
Hartford Courant - FRA Seeks Connecticut Opinions About Northeast Corridor's Future	18


TV & RADIO
Home
FRA presents plans for NEC in Long Island
News 12 Long Island - New York, NY

Amtrak needs $290 Billion to Run through Long Island
News 12 Long Island - New York, NY

FRA to hold public hearing on NEC tonight in Hartford
WTIC-HFD (FOX) - Hartford-New Haven, CT

CSX and First Responders team up on training
WLOX (ABC) - Biloxi, MS

One killed when car is struck by train in Odessa
KAMC (ABC) - Lubbock, TX

Climate change activists on trial for train disruptions
KPLU-FM (Radio) - Seattle, WA

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Associated Press - Canadian Pacific report details its argument for rail merger
January 12, 2016

OMAHA, Neb. — Canadian Pacific is reiterating its argument for acquiring Norfolk Southern in a report released Tuesday.

Canadian Pacific says railroad mergers make sense because the industry needs to increase its capacity to keep up with business.

Canadian Pacific says a merger would allow railroads to handle more freight without adding more tracks and rail yards.

Norfolk Southern has rejected all of Canadian Pacific’s offers. The latest offer could be worth roughly $30 billion to Norfolk Southern investors, but the railroad continues to call it “grossly inadequate.”

Canadian Pacific has said it wants Norfolk Southern’s shareholders to decide whether to move forward.

But even if both railroads agree, the deal will face tough scrutiny from federal regulators who haven’t approved a major rail merger in more than 15 years.

Copyright 2016 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

MHL News - STB Throws Monkey Wrench into Possible CP-NS Merger while Opposition Grows
January 12, 2016
David Sparkman

The Surface Transportation Board has made it clear that approval of one of the key elements of Canadian Pacific’s plan for acquiring rival railroad Norfolk Southern will not go as smoothly as CP has previously claimed.

In its response to a congressional inquiry mailed to it as part of a flurry of correspondence in opposition to the CP-NS merger plan, the board seriously undermined one of the main arguments made by CP’s top management—that it could gain STB approval of a voting trust in which current CP CEO Hunter Harrison would run NS while having no involvement in the direct management of CP for the period when the STB considers approving the overall merger, which could take up to two years.

The NS board of directors already spurned three acquisition offers from CP, each for about $28 billion, terming them inadequate and arguing that STB approval of combining the two major rail lines is highly unlikely.

CP’s Harrison has stated publicly that gaining STB approval for the voting trust arrangement should be fairly easy to obtain since it has done so in the past in other rail mergers, including the 1998 merger involving the Canadian National and Illinois Central, when Harrison left his position as the then-CEO of IC, the acquisition target, to become chief operating officer of the purchasing company, CN.

Those statements were made before the STB responded on January 7 to a letter from Rep. Rob Goodlatte (R-VA), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, and Rep. Tom Marino (R-PA), chairman of the judiciary subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law, expressing their concerns about the merger.

Referring to the voting trust idea floated by CP, the board said it “has not approved that particular arrangement in the context of a proposed merger between two Class I railroads.” In regard to the 1998 CN-IC merger, the STB told the congressional leaders, “Neither the board’s staff opinion on the voting trust, nor the agency’s subsequent decision approving the merger addressed any proposed management shift.”

The board also noted that since 1998 it has changed the rail merger rules in ways that ensure it would “take a much more cautious approach” to approving voting trusts, including assessing whether use of the trust would be consistent with the public interest. “Therefore, should CP pursue a voting trust arrangement with NS in connection with a request for merger approval, the board would consider issues related both to unlawful pre-approval control and to the public interest,” the STB said.

Merger Opposition Grows

Reps. Goodlatte and Marino were not the only legislators to raise concerns over the merger. The ranking minority members of the House Transportation Committee’s Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines and Hazardous Materials—Reps. Michael Capuano (D-MA) and Peter DeFazio (D-OR)—were among many others who also wrote to the STB.

“We do not believe this acquisition or hostile takeover, if CP chooses to go in that direction, is in the public interest, nor will it benefit rail shippers, workers and the standards set forth in the board’s 2001 rulemaking on mergers and acquisitions,” they told the board.

Joining the chorus are 10 members of the Illinois congressional delegation, including Sen. Dick Durbin (D-IL), and the entire Virginia congressional delegation, including Democrat Senators Mark Warner and Tim Kaine, Virginia Governor Terry McCauliffe (D), Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-MN), and an array of state legislators and other state elected officials.

Two unions that represent NS workers publicly revealed their opposition to the merger. The Transportation Communications Union/International Association of Machinists wrote directly to the STB to state its opposition. An official of the International Association of Sheet Metal, Air, Rail and Transportation Workers (SMART) union has not yet reached out to the STB but may do that soon, a union official said.

Watco Companies, a holding company for 35 short-line railroads, said that it has found that rail customers don’t like the proposed merger, in a letter CEO Rick Webb also sent to the board.

“From our day-to-day interactions with the thousands of customer locations we serve, Watco Companies knows that the consolidation of any two major railroads tends to have a negative impact on service and rates,” Webb said. “Many of our customers, including all but one of our connecting Class I carriers, have stated publicly that a merger between two Class I railroads would not be in their best interests.”

Other shipper group that wrote to the STB expressing their opposition include the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers/Association of Global Automakers, Subaru of America, Pennsylvania Chamber and Industry, South Carolina Chamber of Commerce, Indiana Manufacturers Association, Pennsylvania Manufacturers Association, Kentucky Association of Manufacturers and the Michigan Agri-Business Association.

PTC
Home
Buffalo News - Letter: Freight rail industry trying to get PTC installed quickly
January 13, 2016

In response to the Jan. 7 News editorial, “Delay in installation of speed controls leaves railroads vulnerable to accidents,” readers need to know America’s freight railroads are fully committed to implementing Positive Train Control, investing $6 billion thus far to develop, install and test this complex system.

PTC is not off-the-shelf technology and rail operators have developed much of it from scratch. The law passed by Congress recognizes how comprehensive and challenging PTC is and that time is needed for real-world testing and validation to ensure this technology is fully operational and working as it should.

Safety is embedded in all aspects of train operations, with railroads taking actions to further advance the safety of the nation’s 140,000-mile network, including increased track inspections and trackside monitoring technology; enhanced coordination and training with local first responders; and massive investments to rail infrastructure and equipment. PTC technology will be overlay systems, meaning they will supplement existing train safety checks and balances.

Federal statistics show rail safety has been dramatically improving over the last several decades. Said Department of Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx when speaking about crude oil shipments, “The truth is that 99.99 percent of these shipments reach their destination safely.”

The freight rail industry’s focus is to continue working with federal regulators to get PTC installed and implemented as quickly as possible, because we both share the same commitment to making our nation’s rail system even safer.

Patricia M. Reilly

Senior Vice President

Association of American Railroads

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
WLOX (MS) - Train derailment exercise works to improve emergency response
January 12, 2016
Hugh Keeton

Emergency management is all about solving problems when disasters happen. On Tuesday, fire, police and medical personnel from the six coastal counties gathered with the focus on one specific potential crisis.

"We have a lot of rail lines in South Mississippi coming north- south and running east - west," said Harrison County Emergency Management Director Rupert Lacy. "It hits most of our major cities."

So a train derailment is a real possibility. With the help of CSX, emergency responders got together to learn how to deal with a train accident. It wasn't just about trains though. Jackson County Director of Emergency Services Earl Etheridge said exercises like this are also about team building and creating a unified command center across South Mississippi.

"Usually the only time you see anything like this is done as a big major event like for a hurricane or BP event or something like that," said Etheridge. "This is good training with that aspect that gives us good communication skills."

Harrison County's Director of Emergency Management Rupert Lacy said training like this is necessary because many of the first responders haven't had first hand experience with major disasters.

"We've had a lot of new responders move up in the ranks," said Lacy. "What we're trying to do is develop that next level of responders to be able to make those major decisions in a real world scenario."

Rupert added that those in the meeting learned about key trains rolling through the region and practiced how to deal with trains carrying hazardous materials.

Odessa American (TX) - One dead after train-vehicle accident
January 12, 2016

One person is dead after a train and a vehicle collided on the railroad tracks near the intersection of East Second Street and North Dixie Boulevard Tuesday evening.
Few details were available at the scene, but Odessa Police Department Lt. Christopher Primeaux said one man was dead after the accident that happened just before 6 p.m. Primeaux said at the scene the vehicle was going south on North Dixie Boulevard when an eastbound train collided with the vehicle.

The name of the deceased, the type of vehicle, or if the arms near the intersection were down were not immediately known at the scene. Primeaux said the OPD traffic unit would be investigating the accident.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
Newsday (NY) - Federal Railroad Administration officials meet with LI residents on high-speed rail
January 12, 2016
Alfonso A. Castillo

Federal railroad officials faced off with Nassau and Suffolk residents Tuesday over a $290 billion proposal to bring high-speed, intercity rail onto Long Island, and off it via a bridge or tunnel across the Sound.

The Federal Railroad Administration hosted its only planned Long Island public hearing Tuesday on its Northeast Corridor Future program, which aims to improve and expand the busy rail network stretching from Boston to Washington D.C. by 2040.

“We want to see what the appetite is for it: put the options on the table and see how folks feel,” project manager Rebecca Reyes-Alicea said at the Mineola meeting. “We have a lot of technical experts that can do a lot of the analysis and legwork. But when it really hits the ground, we want to be sure we understand what the issues are for the localities across the region.”

In November, the federal agency whittled down nearly 98 options to just four — ranging from doing nothing to the corridor used by more than 700,000 rail riders each day, to its most ambitious proposal: a major redesign of the corridor that could include extending it onto the Island.

Under the plan, a “second spine” of two new train tracks would be built near the Long Island Rail Road’s Main Line. The tracks would be laid along a trench in some areas, elevated in others, and even sink underground at some segments. At Ronkonkoma, they would extend north, across the Long Island Sound to New Haven, Conn.

Trains on the new stretch of tracks could travel at speeds of 125 mph, making stops at Penn Station, Jamaica, the Nassau Hub and Ronkonkoma.

The proposal drew clashing reactions from the approximately 50 people in attendance. Transportation experts and advocates praised its potential to transform rail transportation in the Northeast, and on Long Island, while homeowners expressed deep concern over the proposal’s scope and cost.

 “The MTA is contemplating putting in a third track. Now we’re talking about five tracks,” said Russell Sutherland, of Mineola. “To run Amtrak right through the middle of Long Island would disrupt one of the densest residential, suburban properties in the country. I just can’t conceive that . . . not to mention the expense.”

Paul Floroff of Glen Head, a self-professed “staunch supporter of Amtrak,” said the proposal was well worth its potential expense.

“It would be a lot more convenient for me to go to and from anywhere in the country, without having to go into New York City,” Floroff, 33, said. “From my house to the Nassau Hub takes about 20 minutes. To go from my house to Penn Station, regardless of what station I use, takes over an hour.”

The FRA is accepting public comments, including through the project’s website necfuture.com, through Jan. 30, and expects to select a final proposal this spring.

But several speakers, noting the sparse turnout for yesterday’s hearing and lack of awareness by most Long Island residents and public officials, implored the FRA to slow down and hold more public hearings, including in Suffolk.

“Where is everyone?” a land use and planning writer on Long Island said at the hearing. “This is a big deal for the Island, and nobody’s talking about it.”

LA Times - Costs rise for moving utility lines in construction of bullet train
January 12, 2016
Ralph Vartabedian

The relocation of existing power and data wires to clear way for the California bullet train in the Central Valley is proving to be more risky and difficult than expected, costing tens of millions of dollars more than was projected only several months ago in Tulare, Kings and Kern counties.

The high-speed rail authority’s board approved a prospective $348-million contract Tuesday for a team led by the Spanish construction giant Ferrovial to build an additional 22 miles of rail structures.

But the amount does not include an estimated $107 million in additional work that was pulled out of the contract last year to relocate utilities along the route.

As recently as last October, the cost of those utilities relocations was estimated at $35.1 million, according to an addendum to state bidding documents. As of last May, the utility relocations were supposed to be fully included in the contract, the documents show.

The cost of building the 22 miles, including the utility work and hazardous material removal, totals about $450 million, which appears to fall in the middle of the $400-million to $500-million estimate that state officials made last May, the documents show.

So while costs for utilities have jumped, the overall cost for the 22 miles is not busting through estimates.

Rail officials have asserted, including as recently as Tuesday, that the Ferrovial bid came in below its estimate, part of a long-standing narrative that aggressive bidding by the construction industry is holding down building costs in the Central Valley.

Critics of the bullet train project, however, dismiss such estimates as irrelevant and say that the state’s accounting system is not providing a transparent picture of whether the overall cost of building the Central Valley segment is staying within the roughly $6-billion budget for the work.

In addition to the design and build contracts, the Central Valley work includes management fees, land purchases, utility work, legal fees and many other categories of expenses.

“I have seen nothing that shows how they are performing against their budget,” said Elizabeth Alexis, co-founder of a Bay Area group that has closely monitored spending.

At the same time, other metrics in the project are sending warning signals. The Central Valley work is falling behind schedule, as the state finds it far more difficult than expected to acquire land along the right of way for the future tracks.

A just-released operations report by the rail authority shows it has acquired 376 of the 711 parcels it needs for the first 29 miles of the route from Madera to Fresno, well below the 518 parcels that were expected to be in hand by now.

The vote to approve Ferrovial for the job will allow rail agency staff to negotiate a final contract. The Ferrovial team includes the Spanish engineering firm Euroestudios and the Houston engineering firm Othon Inc. Spanish firms are leading two of the three teams that have won contracts so far.

Exactly why the utility relocations are costing about 25% of the entire construction cost of the 22 miles of track structures in Kings, Tulare and Kern counties was not made clear Tuesday at the board meeting, but officials suggested that the authority had underestimated the difficulty of the job in other segments.

The decision to take the utility relocations out of the contract was based on a lack of information to accurately estimate the cost, not only for state officials but for companies bidding for the work, according to state engineering chief Scott Jarvis.

The newest construction segment, which runs just north of the Tulare and Kings county border to just north of the city of Shafter, shows some of the difficulty in predicting costs.

A San Francisco attorney representing SunnyGem, one of the state’s largest almond processing companies, told the board Tuesday that his efforts to set a meeting with senior state rail officials have been “ignored.”

Attorney Ivor Samson said the rail route would cut through crucial pieces a 200,000-square-foot almond plant in Wasco, which would cost tens of millions of dollars to replace.

Samson said that the decision by the state to open a supplemental environmental review of the segment to reconsider the route through urban Bakersfield should open up reconsideration of the rail’s impact on the almond plant.

Board Chairman Dan Richard acknowledged that he had meant to set up a meeting with Samson during December and would promptly schedule a meeting.

Associated Press - High-speed rail board OKs bid for rail in Kern County
January 12, 2016

SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — The board that oversees California's high-speed rail project has approved a $444.3 million bid to design and build a 22-mile segment of the route in Kern County.

Rail authority staff recommended a consortium of construction and engineering companies called California Rail Builders as the best value bid. The board approved the contract on a 6-0 vote Tuesday.

Officials previously announced the lowest bid for the work was $347.5 million, but said in a presentation Tuesday that the variable price is $444.3 million. That includes provisional costs to relocate utilities.

Construction on the $68 billion project has been behind schedule as the state has struggled to acquire land from reluctant sellers in the Central Valley.

HHFT
Home
The News & Advance (VA) - Crude by rail down, but officials still bracing for danger on tracks
January 12, 2016
Alex Rohr

Bakken crude oil shipments by rail have fallen with oil prices, but danger along Virginia’s rails has not gone away, members of the Railroad Safety and Security Task Force said.

The task force called by Governor Terry McAuliffe after the CSX Transportation Inc. train derailed in downtown Lynchburg almost two years ago considers terrorist attacks among many threats related to the hazardous materials running through the commonwealth.

“The threat environment’s changed. Everybody’s seen that overseas, you’ve seen it here at home. The rail environment is a threat vector. It’s something the railroads worry about,” Deputy Secretary of Public Safety and Homeland Security Adam Thiel said.

Attacks on an office in San Bernardino, California, in December and in Paris in November highlighted potential domestic terrorist threats. The state already had considered rail a potential target as referenced in the task force’s May report. The report named rail safety inspection, trespassing reduction and infrastructure protection as the top three actions the state could take in preventing rail incidents.

The Task Force formed not long after a train carrying Bakken crude from the West to Yorktown derailed in Lynchburg on April 30, 2014, puncturing a tanker that ignited a fireball and sent thousands of gallons of oil into the James River. A similar incident occurred just up the track in Mount Carbon, West Virginia, in February. Bakken crude shipments running along that track have dropped to one per week at most, CSX and state representatives said.

“I think this is why strategically from the outset, this is a rail safety and security task force, not a Bakken crude oil task force,” Thiel said. “We had a lot of the same conversation around ethanol and then we had it around Bakken crude, and the reality is there are myriad hazardous materials every day. As a firefighter by trade, those are probably not the ones I worry about the most.”

Secretary of Public Safety and Homeland Security Brian Moran said the entities combined to look at the especially flammable Bakken crude oil and other hazardous materials could address potential terrorist threats. He said the U.S. Department of Homeland Security provided Virginia resources for an employee to work with stakeholders to identify “critical infrastructure” for protection.

“There’s a lot of synergy there. It’s somewhat similar in nature. Obviously we have things on the rails we wouldn’t want to derail whether it by accident or intentional. … Department of Homeland Security has some resources we may be able to avail ourselves of under the rubric of that type of threat as opposed to derailment by erosion,” Moran said after the meeting.

Thiel said the governor’s $109 billion budget includes millions toward Virginia Department of Emergency Management improvements, new hires for fire department training programs, and investment into communication among VDEM, local responders, train companies and their contractors.

VDEM Department of Fire Programs’ mission includes training 760 fire departments, 494 of which are volunteer-based. If approved, the budget request would help hire employees to train volunteers in particular, Deputy Executive Director Brook Pittinger said.

The budget requests follow up on state efforts during the last two years, including $395,000 in grants to support local governments in 2014 and $351,000 in 2015, according to the VDEM presentation. Not all of the latter has received final approval. VDEM also procured four sets of advanced emergency response equipment to handle large hazardous materials incidents, according to the presentation.

“To the extent that we deal with a Bakken crude incident, that really depends on the basic capabilities that underpin our response to any type of incident,” Thiel said.

Thiel briefed task force members on a bill expected from the Governor’s Office that would allow the state to hold back certain information related to transportation shipments. As it stands, information VDEM employees want for detailed emergency planning would be available to the public through state’s Freedom of Information Act, but not the federal law, he said. He said transporters do not share this information with the state to ensure it does not reach the public.

Thiel called the information a “cookbook” for anyone planning a terrorist attack using rail.

“We believe communities need to know generally what’s transient in their communities. There’s more specific information that we would want to use for detailed emergency planning that if we had that today it would immediately be subject to public disclosure,” Thiel said.

Bakken crude shipments by rail are down to not even one per week, according to state and CSX representatives. Reuters reported Tuesday the price per barrel fell below $30 for the first time in 12 years, dropping 20 percent during the last year. Several task force members said the rapid and consistent drop is unprecedented.

On Feb. 23, 2015, CSX had notified VDEM shipments would increase from two to five per week to four to six, according to the presentation.

“This drop in crude oil prices was unforeseen by just about everybody,” Secretary of Transportation Aubrey Layne said during the meeting.

AMTRAK
Home
New York Times - How to Transform Penn Station: Move the Garden
January 12, 2016
Michael Kimmelman

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo entreated New Yorkers last week to “think big” again, invoking Robert Moses, New York’s take-no-prisoners planning czar of the 20th century.

He was talking about fixing Pennsylvania Station, and presumably he meant the good Moses, the young, public-spirited idealist who opened parks and beaches. The bad Moses displaced hundreds of thousands of poor people and foisted other calamities on the city. But yes, he thought big.

So, while it was encouraging that the governor championed Penn’s cause, it was odd that he channeled Moses only to come up with what sounded like glassy new lobbies and shopping malls to improve the station’s ambience.

He passed on the really big idea: moving Madison Square Garden.

Penn Station needs to grow, fast, with new passenger rail tunnels under the Hudson River to accommodate booming demand. The current tunnel plan is called Gateway. It would deliver riders to platforms south of the existing station, onto the block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, from 30th to 31st Streets, which will become, in effect, Penn South. A new, 21st-century-worthy Penn Station, incorporating Penn South, and eventually accommodating high-speed trains, requires a coherent reorganization of the whole complex, with wider platforms; a safer, more consolidated layout to improve circulation; and more light and air. It’s hard to picture how any of that could happen as it should, with the Garden squatting on top of the station.

So what are the latest plans?

Last week, Mr. Cuomo trumpeted a long-stymied proposal that former Democratic senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan advanced back in the early 1990s. It would give over one end of the nearly empty James A. Farley Post Office — the immense neo-Classical building designed by McKim, Mead & White, with tall columns, across Eighth Avenue from Penn Station — to what, boiled down, will become a shopping mall and an Amtrak ticket hall.

For the senator, who died in 2003, there was poetic justice to the idea. It restored to a great public site some of the architectural dignity lost when McKim, Mead & White’s Penn Station was demolished half a century ago.

But Amtrak riders account for only 7 percent of the hundreds of thousands of passengers using the Long Island Rail Road, New Jersey Transit and subways, who suffer Penn Station each day. And Amtrak’s platforms cannot be moved, so many riders trekking to the new ticket hall will have to schlep extra-long distances to find their seats on the trains, a fresh hardship.

The governor, at the same time, floated the idea of demolishing the 5,600-seat theater now beneath Madison Square Garden, to make way for a glassy entrance to Penn Station along the east side of Eighth Avenue. This idea has also occasionally surfaced over the years as a means of bringing light and air underground that’s less drastic than razing the whole Garden.

But is it? Imagine removing the ground floor of your house while trying to keep the upstairs in place. That’s the theater plan in a nutshell, except, in this case, upstairs is a sporting arena the size of an Alpine foothill. It would be a feat of engineering that might end up costing $1 billion — which is a plausible price tag for building a spanking-new, state-of-the-art Garden on some other site.

Where? Well, how about across Eighth Avenue, in the old Farley building, the same place where Amtrak really makes no sense.

This was, in effect, the plan a decade ago. Back then, the goal involved shoehorning both the Moynihan Amtrak ticket hall, along with a new Garden, into the Farley building, a historic landmark. Preservationists grumbled. The Garden had to squeeze. But for a while its owners, the Dolans, were on board.

Then Eliot Spitzer, New York’s governor at the time, resigned. Without the governor pushing the plan, the Dolans backed out, instead deciding to renovate the existing Garden, where they have long enjoyed exceptionally hefty tax breaks at public expense, but now operate by virtue of a special city permit set to expire in seven years.

The Dolans clearly show not the slightest sign that they take that deadline seriously — unsurprisingly, what with City Hall and Albany declining to challenge them, only nibbling around the edges to fix Penn Station. But even putting aside tax breaks and the special permit as tools that strong politicians might use for leverage, there are good reasons that the Garden’s owners and shareholders should actually welcome another shot at Farley.

The Garden continues to age, after all. The Farley site is linked to the same Penn transit hub. There’s a governor in office staking a major part of his reputation on Penn, transit and infrastructure. Many of the obstacles that thwarted the Farley plan eight years ago may no longer stand in the way. The space once earmarked for Amtrak could be given over to the Garden, solving earlier space concerns. Preservationists, who helped undo the earlier plan, might now look to the Ricoh Coliseum in Toronto or Norman Foster’s design for the Hearst Tower for the upside of adaptive reuse.

Most important, a new arena — which should cost the Dolans less to operate, with direct truck access to the floor of the arena at Farley — could also come free, paid for by developers who, in return, would get retail and air rights at Penn Station. There are millions of valuable square feet of unused air rights where the Garden is now. Those could be unlocked and developed as part of the plan to redo Penn Station properly.

Some of these Garden air rights could be used at Penn South, on the block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues and 31st and 30th Streets, which will need to be entirely redeveloped. Guidelines can ensure that a new station won’t become just another shopping mall, like the $4 billion World Trade Center Path hub.

And with the number of commuters using the passenger tunnels under the Hudson expected to double to 100 million a year from 50 million a year after Gateway is finished, even a small surcharge on riders will yield billions to pay for the new station. The governor has given developers 90 days to put in bids for his plans. Some enterprising developer should use the opportunity to propose moving the Garden, and a complete do-over for Penn and Penn South.

Skeptics will argue that moving the Garden was tried before and that the plan failed, so we shouldn’t let the best get in the way of the good. This is the equivalent of saying that New York can no longer achieve complicated tasks, so we must settle for compromise, exactly what Moses could never abide, which is the real point Mr. Cuomo ought to have been making about him.

Anyhow, it’s not true that New York can’t still do big things. We have rebuilt Bryant Park, the World Trade Center, Grand Central Terminal and Columbus Circle, and transformed acres and acres of formerly grimy waterfront.

Nobody is claiming that moving the Garden and devising a new, logically organized station, including Penn South, isn’t the ideal solution, superior to any costly, scattershot, half-baked plans on the table — only that doing so is too much trouble.

Much of the city’s economic future and the growth of the West Side, not to mention the daily welfare of millions of working people, now depend on getting Penn Station right.

We are better than this.

Long Island News - Feds propose Amtrak route through LI to Boston
January 12, 2016

WOODBURY - The Federal Railroad Administration is considering a new Amtrak route in an effort to alleviate congestion from the Northeast Corridor.

The new route would extend from New York City through Floral Park, to Port Jefferson, under the Long Island Sound, and up to Boston.

According to federal officials, the route would include new and existing trenches and tunnels, embankments and aerial structures.
The Northeast Corridor Joint Program Manager Rebecca Reyes-Alicea says the current Amtrak route from Washington, D.C. to Boston is more than 100 years old. She says the cost of the project could potentially be $290 billion.

"The cost of doing nothing is so significant," says Reyes-Alicea.

The plan involving a Long Island route is one of three plans proposed for the Northeast Corridor. If adopted, it wouldn’t be complete until 2040.

STATE BY STATE
Home
NorthJersey.com - Labor board decides in favor of NJ Transit workers
January 12, 2016
Christopher Maag

For the second time in a row, a board set up by President Obama to fix NJ Transit’s long-simmering dispute with its workers has decided in favor of the workers, finding that the agency’s unionized rail employees should receive a large pay raise. The report, obtained by The Record, brings the agency one step closer to ending a labor dispute that has dragged on since 2011.

But it also creates a potentially perilous situation for NJ Transit, its workers and commuters. The dispute could end in a fare increase of nearly 30 percent, a labor shutdown that leaves 295,000 people without the trains they use every day, or both.

The Presidential Emergency Board decided that NJ Transit should give its unionized train workers an 18 percent pay raise over the next two years. That plus rising payments for employees’ health care would cost NJ Transit an additional $183 million between now and 2018, the agency told the federal board.

Such a contract is “not affordable,” NJ Transit said in its filings to the board, setting up the potential for a second fare increase in as many years. In 2015, NJ Transit hiked fares by 9 percent to cover a budget gap of $56 million. Paying the entire wage increase through fares would require a fare hike of 29 percent, if no other sources of revenue are found.

Such an increase would be politically unacceptable, NJ Transit told the federal board, and “would divert riders away” from NJ Transit.

For now, NJ Transit and its unions have a 60-day “cooling off” period, in which they may weigh their options. If neither side is willing to compromise, each is allowed under federal law to take radical measures. The unions may strike, or NJ Transit may lock out union members from its rail properties.

All of which could mean a shutdown of NJ Transit trains as early as March 12. That would leave 295,000 people a day looking for other means of transportation.

This is the second round of Presidential Emergency Boards that has decided in favor of the unions over NJ Transit. In both rounds the unions had asked for similar terms. They included a pay raise of about 18 percent over seven years, including back pay from 2011, when its current contract first was eligible for renegotiation, plus a modest increase in employees’ health insurance costs, tapping out at 2.5 percent of their base salaries.

NJ Transit’s offer was far more modest, with wage increases averaging about 1.25 percent annually, most or all of which would have been consumed by employees’ responsibility to pay up to 20 percent of their health insurance costs.

Philly Mag - FRA Has Plans for a Rail Tunnel Under Center City to the Airport
January 12, 2016
Sandy Smith

The Federal Railroad Administration, having come up with three plans for the future of the Northeast Corridor (NEC) came back to Philadelphia yesterday to gather public comment on each of the plans.

Most of those who commented had this message: If you really want to transform the NEC, you’d better cut out a lot of the gold-plating on that top-drawer plan.

The FRA's three plans, and their price tags, are:

"Maintain" — fix bottlenecks, replace crumbling tunnels, add two new Hudson River tunnels and add some new track to permit some 160-mph service and increase capacity. Cost: $65 billion

"Grow" — build new track alignments in several places, including service to Philadelphia International Airport and an inland route in New England, to permit more 160-mph service and meet projected demand past 2040. Cost: $135 billion

"Transform" — Build a second NEC spine from Washington to Boston that would allow 220-mph service on the entire corridor and serve new markets in New England and possibly Long Island, including a tunnel under PHL and Center City Philadelphia with a new station at Market East. Cost: $290 billion

A "no action" alternative with a price tag of $20 billion was also presented for purposes of comparison.

That proposed tunnel beneath the airport and Center City drew the heaviest fire from the commenters who testified at the early session yesterday. Jeff Kessler, executive chairman of SEPTA's Youth Advisory Council, said in a personal extension of his comment on behalf of the group that the tunnel was one of several "unfeasible" elements in the "Transform" proposal that eliminate it from consideration, but that elements of that plan should be incorporated into the other proposals. Transit activist Scott Maitz said the tunnel would be less likely to "transform" Philadelphia than a 30th Street Station alignment would, as the city's downtown is headed in that direction, and suggested that airport service be provided via a new alignment paralleling a slimmed-down Bartram Avenue.

Transit blogger Michael Noda (Sic Transit Philadelphia) had the most trenchant criticism of this segment and the entire "Transform" alternative. He called the cost estimate for that option "inflated for reasons that defy understanding" and said that its benefits could be obtained at an 85 percent saving by getting rid of elements such as the tunnel. "The detour to the airport is great if you can get American Airlines to pay for it," he said. "We cannot commit to spending twice as much as the Japanese are spending for maglev from Tokyo to Nagoya." He recommended focusing first on "very unsexy" fixes that could be done on the cheap and implemented soon, such as replacing outmoded switches and interlockings, and coming up with less costly alternatives for reducing or bypassing tight-radius curves that slow trains down.

That last sentiment was echoed by other commenters, such as Philadelphia resident Robert Sutton, who said that while the country needs to understand the benefits of high-speed trains better and that there should be alternate routes for high-speed service in the Northeast, "we need improvements not in 25 or 30 years, but now."

The Philadelphia forum was one of 11 the FRA is holding up and down the Northeast Corridor to gather public feedback; that feedback will in turn influence the FRA's final selection of a preferred alternative, which it intends to make this spring.

Hartford Courant - FRA Seeks Connecticut Opinions About Northeast Corridor's Future
January 12, 2016
Don Stacom

Federal regulators are scheduled to visit the city Wednesday to hear public opinion about various proposals for modernizing Amtrak's heavily used Northeast Corridor.

Some options that the Federal Railroad Administration is considering would route at least some of the busy Boston-to-New York service through Hartford. That means central Connecticut residents and businesses have a stake in whatever decision the FRA makes.

Staffers from the FRA's Washington, D.C., headquarters will be at the Lyceum at 227 Lawrence St. from 4 to 7 p.m. The agency will give brief presentations at 4:30 and 6 p.m., but its primary goal is to listen to comments from the public.

The Hartford forum is one of 11 the FRA is putting on in cities along the Northeast Corridor. The schedule began in Boston on Dec. 9 and ends Jan. 20 in Wilmington, Del.

Later in the winter, the agency expects to select one of the four main options for the Northeast Corridor's long-term future.

At stake is how the most densely populated part of the country copes with worsening traffic congestion and the prospect of rising populations. At the same time, there are likely to be economic ramifications for Hartford and New Haven, which both want to be along the future route.

"Over the next 30 years, an additional 6 million people will live along this corridor," says U.S. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx.

After studying how Boston to Washington, D.C., rail service should improve over the next 30 years, the FRA focused on four choices. The simplest would be to repair the existing infrastructure and keep relying on traditional electric and diesel trains.

One option is to shift the tracks between Old Saybrook and Stonington inland by a few miles. That would allow far faster speeds by eliminating the long series of track curves and bends in southeastern Connecticut. A costlier option is to build a new right of way stretching diagonally from Danbury to Waterbury to Hartford to Boston.

And the most expensive and ambitious idea is to run trains from New York about halfway out on Long Island, then direct them into Connecticut through a miles-long tunnel under Long Island Sound. From New Haven, they'd go north to Hartford before cutting eastward to continue on to Boston.

Between Amtrak and the various commuter railroads that use the Northeast Corridor, passenger trips average about 750,000 a day — at least along some part of the current 457-mile route.

Metro-North and Shore Line East run on sections of it, and elsewhere there are trains from NJ Transit, Virginia Railway Express, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, the Maryland Area Regional Commuter operation and the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority. In addition, the line carries the freight trains of four separate companies, the FRA reports.

3


