 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 6, 2016
TV & RADIO
MBTA Commuter Rail Train Derails Leaving Commuters in Freezing Cold	2
PTC Wouldn’t Have Prevented Recent Train vs Car Crash	2
Quiet Zones Comes with a Price	2
Victim on Tracks Result in Deadly Train Accident	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Railway Age - OLI names new President  & CEO	2
RAIL INCIDENTS
Lowell Sun - Fed inspectors investigating cause of Haverhill train derailment	3
Associated Press - 11 freight train cars derail in east-central Kansas	4
HIGH SPEED RAIL
Los Angeles Times - Bids for bullet train construction show apparent winner for next phase	4
Associated Press - Officials recommend $350 million bid for high-speed rail	6
AMTRAK
CBS New York - CBS2 Exclusive: Northeast Corridor Upgrade Could Have Amtrak Trains Barreling Through Long Island	6
USA Today - Amtrak's Southwest Chief service keeps rolling on new tracks	8
STATE BY STATE
Boston Globe (MA) - Despite cold-weather woes, T says it’s ready for winter season	10
Boston.com - Tuesday’s Red Line, commuter rail issues likely due to cold weather	13
Hartford Courant (CT) - Crews Prepare For Next Phase Of Hartford Line Construction	14
Tulsa World (OK) - City of Claremore pursuing "quiet zone" status for noisy trains	16
Coloradoan - Fort Collins continues train horn noise mitigation efforts	17
New York Times - Cuomo Revives Long-Stalled Plan to Add Track to L.I.R.R.	18
Progressive Railroading - Wisconsin DOT allocates $31 million for freight-rail projects	20


TV & RADIO
Home
FRA Proposing Massive Improvements by 2040 for Northeast Corridor
WCBS-NY (CBS) - New York, NY

MBTA Commuter Rail Train Derails Leaving Commuters in Freezing Cold
New England Cable News - Boston, MA

PTC Wouldn’t Have Prevented Recent Train vs Car Crash
WFLX (FOX) - West Palm Beach, FL

Quiet Zones Comes with a Price
WDJT-MILW (CBS) - Milwaukee, WI

Victim on Tracks Result in Deadly Train Accident
KOCO-OKC (ABC) - Oklahoma City, OK

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Railway Age - OLI names new President & CEO
January 5, 2016
Carolina Worrell

Bonnie Murphy, a former commuter rail executive and Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) official, will become President and CEO of Operation Lifesaver, Inc. (OLI) in late January, OLI Board Chair Bill Barringer announced Jan. 5, 2016.

“Bonnie’s expertise in the rail industry, her deep understanding of safety issues and track record of accomplishing organizational goals will advance Operation Lifesaver’s mission to prevent collisions, injuries and fatalities on and around railroad tracks and highway-rail grade crossings,” said Barringer. “She brings extensive leadership experience to the position, as well as familiarity with the responsibilities of state Operation Lifesaver programs from her work with the FRA,” he noted.?

Murphy is a veteran of both the railroad industry and the federal government with 30 years of professional railroad experience and 10 years of executive-level government experience.

Currently a consultant with engineering and technology services firm CDI Corporation, Murphy was previously general manager with the Massachusetts Bay Commuter Rail (MBCR), the nation’s fifth-largest commuter rail system. From 2003-2013, before joining MBCR, Murphy served with the FRA as regional administrator for the Southwest, based in Texas, and later as deputy associate administrator for safety compliance and program implementation in Washington, DC.

Before her tenure with the FRA, Murphy was director and chief operating officer of Trinity Rail Express, the commuter rail service between Fort Worth and Dallas, Tex. She began her career with Amtrak, the national passenger rail system, serving as general supervisor and assistant transportation manager in Chicago, transportation manager in San Jose, Calif., and senior transportation manager in Oceanside, Calif.

Murphy holds a Master of Business Administration, Master of International Business and Master of Criminal Justice from Touro University, and a Bachelor in Business Administration from Le Tourneau University in Longview, Tex.

“95% percent of all rail-related deaths involve drivers at a railroad crossing or a person on the tracks. I am excited about the opportunity to address these critical public safety issues, and I look forward to joining the Operation Lifesaver team,” said Murphy.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Lowell Sun - Fed inspectors investigating cause of Haverhill train derailment
January 5, 2016
Andy Metzger

BOSTON -- A commuter rail train without any passengers derailed north of the Andover station Tuesday morning, a day after MBTA overseers advanced two options for hiking fares this year by roughly 6.7 percent or 9.7 percent.

Mac Daniel, a spokesman for Keolis Commuter Services, the commuter rail operator, told the News Service the train was traveling northbound to set up for morning service. The derailment occurred about 4 a.m., according to Daniel, who said a conductor and an engineer were on board and no one was injured.

The two derailed coaches - which did not tip over - clogged railroad commutes north of Boston as it tied up trains farther up the line. Keolis canceled some runs and used buses to transport riders between Haverhill and Andover.

MBTA spokesman Joe Pesaturo said the incident is under investigation.

"The Federal Railroad Administration has three inspectors on site where the MBTA derailment occurred near Andover earlier today and is investigating the cause. Prior to the line returning to active service, MBTA must inspect the repaired section of track, along with signals and any switches within the derailment area, as required by federal regulations," a Federal Railroad spokesperson told the News Service in a statement.

Daniel said officials are looking at track infrastructure as the possible cause of the derailment and expects commuter rail service to be "full steam" for the afternoon commute.

On Tuesday afternoon, Daniel told the News Service the first train had just recently traversed the section of repaired track.
"The track structure failed. We don't really know why at this point," Rich Murphy, director of train operations for Keolis, said in a video posted online Tuesday morning explaining the delays.

Including the derailed train, five trains were trapped north of Andover as a result of the accident, according to Keolis.

Associated Press - 11 freight train cars derail in east-central Kansas
January 5, 2016

PARKER, Kan. (AP) — Crews are cleaning up after a freight train derailed in east-central Kansas.

Union Pacific Railroad said in a written statement that 11 of the train's 166 cars jumped the tracks around 5 p.m. Monday near the Linn County town of Parker. The derailed cars were carrying lumber and soda ash, which is sometimes used to treat drinking water and not considered extremely hazardous. The statement says no one was injured.

The train was headed from Nebraska to Texas, powered by six locomotives.

Union Pacific says a team is working on cleaning up the site and reopening the line. Train traffic is being rerouted through the southeast Kansas town of Coffeyville.

The cause of the derailment is under investigation.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
Los Angeles Times - Bids for bullet train construction show apparent winner for next phase
January 5, 2016
Ralph Vartabedian

The California High-Speed Rail Authority unsealed bids Tuesday for the construction of 22 additional miles of structures and rail bed in the Central Valley, identifying a team led by the Spanish-based construction firm Ferrovial as the low bidder and “apparent” best value.

The team bid $348 million for the job, much less than three other teams that offered to do the work for $377 million to $582 million.

A bid by a fifth team, led by another Spanish firm, was discarded by the authority as non-responsive to its requirements.

The 22-mile segment would be the third section the agency has contracted since 2013, completing most of the $6 billion of construction awards that has been planned over the last four years in the Central Valley.

The initial construction section is to run 122 miles from Madera to Shafter, roughly eight miles less than originally planned. It would include rail bed, bridges, trenches, viaducts and other structures.

The rail would be installed under a separate contract yet to be awarded. The planned work does not include high-voltage electrical systems or signals that would be needed to operate bullet trains.

The Ferrovial team, which includes the Spanish engineering firm Euroestudios and the Houston-based engineering firm Othon, would begin its work just north of the Tulare-Kings county line and continue south to the northern border of Shafter.

The contract would include construction of viaducts, highway work, wildlife crossings and the relocation of four miles of existing Burlington Northern Sante Fe track.

The first construction contract in the Central Valley, covering 29 miles through Fresno, is about two years behind schedule. So far, a bridge over the Fresno River is the only major structure underway. The authority has said it will make up any delays by moving more quickly in the future.

“We continue to attract world-leading design and construction firms who want to be a part of high-speed rail in California,” said Jeff Morales, chief executive of the rail authority.

“People are already and will continue to see major construction projects underway on over 100 miles of infrastructure in the Central Valley as we move this program forward,” Morales said.

The entire 122-mile section was originally planned to be completed by next year, when federal grants made under the Obama administration stimulus act are set to expire and might have to be forfeited. But at least some of that work has slipped into 2018 or beyond.

It is becoming increasingly difficult for the state to spend all of the roughly $2 billion in stimulus money by the federal deadline of Sept. 30, 2017.

The Spanish team, led by Ferrovial’s U.S. unit, is expected to be selected by the authority’s board at a meeting later this month, allowing a formal contract to be negotiated by its staff. The contract process began in November 2014, about 14 months ago.

Ferrovial has won extensive work in the U.S., including a contract late last year to rebuild a section of interstate highway in Atlanta.

The company outbid teams led by Salini Impregilo, Dragados and Tutor Perini. Dragados and Tutor Perini won two earlier bullet train contracts.

The Ferrovia bid came in under the estimate that the authority made in 2014, when it projected the segment would cost $700 million to $900 million, prior to the decision to eliminate eight miles of track from the contract.

In its announcement Tuesday, the authority said it was expecting the contract bids to fall between $400 million and $500 million.

Associated Press - Officials recommend $350 million bid for high-speed rail
January 5, 2016

SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) — California high-speed rail officials are recommending a $350 million bid to design and build a 22-mile segment of the rail line through Tulare and Kings counties.

The rail authority said Tuesday that a bid from California Rail Builders appears to be the best value for the state. It made the recommendation to the rail authority board of directors, which is meeting next week.
Construction on the $68 billion project has been behind schedule as the state has struggled to acquire land from reluctant sellers in the Central Valley.

Authority CEO Jeff Morales says work on more than 100 miles of infrastructure will soon be under way in the Central Valley.

Five teams bid on Construction Package 4. The winning bid came in under estimates of $400 million to $500 million.

AMTRAK
Home
CBS New York - CBS2 Exclusive: Northeast Corridor Upgrade Could Have Amtrak Trains Barreling Through Long Island
January 5, 2016

The Federal Railroad Administration has proposed massive improvements to Amtrak’s very congested Northeast Corridor.

One little known proposal calls for an all new route right through the heart of Long Island.

As CBS2’s Carolyn Gusoff reported, by 2040, rail travel on Long Island could look a lot different, with Amtrak passenger trains barreling through.

The study by the Federal Railroad Administration said the Northeast Corridor must improve.

“Much of it is over 100 years old, so we are building infrastructure for our future,” said Rebecca Reyes-Alicea, Northeast Corridor Joint Program Manager for the Federal Railroad Administration.

The options include maintaining, growing, or transforming the route from Washington to New England.

One of those options traverses the heart of Long Island, and would extend Amtrak’s high speed rail line from Floral Park east to Ronkonkoma, then north to Port Jefferson continuing through a new Long Island Sound rail tunnel. The plan would have 75 trains per day linking Long Island and Boston.

“The Long Island option (Alternative 3) includes several options for adding a second spine to the Northeast Corridor. In one option, a two-track high-speed main line is added generally parallel to the existing Long Island Railroad right-of-way from Penn Station New York to Ronkonkoma, where it then heads north under the Long Island Sound to Connecticut, Hartford, and Boston. The separate alignment for the NEC second spine would enable LIRR to add its third track without interference. The second spine would be designed for high-speed limited-stop express intercity and commuter rail service to and from New York City,” the FRA explained.

The 160 mph trains would require new tracks. The report mentioned building a network of tunnels, embankments, elevated tracks, and trenches.

Time is running out for public comment but village mayors and residents appeared to be caught off guard.

“I never heard of this, what are you talking about?” one man said.

“There are a lot of moving pieces and a lot of local governments that are going to be caught blindsided,” Planning Columnist Richard Murdocco added.

Murdocco said the public has been left out.

“Politically it may be a non-starter, but what’s more concerning is the lack of public input in the process,” he said.

Some anticipate massive opposition.

“I think it’s ambitious. If you were starting from scratch, Long Island was an empty canvass, but today I don’t see that happening,” said Kevin Law. President of the Long Island Association.

Others said Long Island needs to connect with the Northeast Corridor’s high speed trains to ease traffic.

“Of course it’s feasible. They do this all over Europe, the Chinese are doing it all through China and there they have billions of people,” Former Suffolk County Executive, Patrick Halpin said.

Long Island’s one and only public hearing is next week, and federal planners said nothing is etched in stone.

“We want to hear what is most important. What are the deal breakers, what are the things that matter the most?” Reyes-Alicea said.

A preferred option will be selected by springtime.

The public hearing will be held on January 12 from 4 to 7 p.m. in Mineola at the Nassau County Municipal Bldg, at 1550 Franklin Ave. The public comment period ends on January 30.

The FRA said that they have not reached a final decision, and are holding public meetings to seek public input.

USA Today - Amtrak's Southwest Chief service keeps rolling on new tracks
January 5, 2016
Trevor Hughes

GARDEN CITY, Kan.— Amtrak's Southwest Chief train is rumbling through the pre-dawn darkness just east of the Colorado border when a pickup truck pulls into view on U.S. Highway 50, which parallels the tracks.

The truck slowly catches up to the train and then passes us, its taillights disappearing toward the Rockies. We'll never catch up because our 268,000-pound locomotive isn't allowed to go that fast.

"We're just moseying along," says conductor Marcelino Martinez.

Welcome to cross-country train travel, circa 2015.

Here, on the plains of Kansas, one of the country's premier train routes is limited to no more than 79 mph, and that's a best-case scenario. Much of the time, the train runs far slower on the scenic eight-state route tracing portions of the pioneer Santa Fe Trail from Chicago to Los Angeles.

The tracks have deteriorated to the point where federal officials have limited the train's speed across Kansas, Colorado and New Mexico, in some cases to just 30 or 40 mph, lengthening the trip by two hours. The privately owned tracks are fine for freight traffic, which is what they're mostly used for: "Coal doesn't care when it gets there," says Amtrak spokesman Marc Magliari.

For rail enthusiasts, things could actually be much worse. In 2012, the tracks' owner, BNSF Railway, told Amtrak it needed to come up with $100 million to upgrade the tracks if it wanted to keep using the rails. Amtrak, a federal agency that runs the U.S. rail system  , didn't  have that kind of money.

Unlike Europe or Asia, where rail systems are highly subsidized by national governments, America's railroad system remains largely private and almost entirely focused on freight. Passenger rail is generally a money-loser because people prefer to travel by private car or airplane. That's created a vicious cycle out here in the West: Amtrak's federally funded service isn't as convenient, which means fewer people take it, leaving the agency with less money to maintain its system, forcing it to consolidate routes and cut service, which makes it even less attractive.

And that's coming at a time when passenger rail travel is at an all-time high for Amtrak. The challenge is that most of Amtrak's success comes on the heavily populated East Coast, where 10 cities are responsible for two-thirds of all ridership on short commuter routes. In the West, by contrast, trains are emptier and cover vast distances between tiny towns.

Many Western leaders worry Amtrak will cancel even more service, in some cases further isolating small towns that depend heavily on access to the train and the tourist dollars it can bring. In Lamar, Colo., pop. 7,700, the train's twice-daily passage temporarily blocks the main street. But folks there don't see that as a problem.

"It's a lifeline out of our community, but also coming into our community," says Mayor Roger Stagner. "A lot of people who come to visit, end up coming back."

Amtrak conductor Billy Ray Pearson chats with the train's.

The Southwest Chief carries about 350,000 passengers annually, including about 5,000 Boy Scouts visiting the historic Philmont Ranch in New Mexico. The trains run across the fruited plains and give riders a chance to see the purple mountain majesty of Pikes Peak and the Rockies. The train rumbles through former frontier towns like Dodge City, Kan., across southern Colorado and then into Northern New Mexico before winding past the Grand Canyon and onto L.A, knitting together communities far from airports or major highways.

Residents of those small towns in 2012 were shocked to hear Amtrak was considering re-routing the service or canceling it entirely as the tracks slowly degraded. They held a series of emergency meetings in which elected officials across three states pledged to work together to save the service by fixing the tracks.

It worked. Local and state taxpayers found millions of dollars to get the work started. A pair of federal grants are now providing another $27 million to make a major dent in the maintenance needs.

Today, workers are cutting out older sections of rails and replacing them with newly forged track. In some cases, the rails and ties date to the late 1940s. Originally sourced from a steel mill in nearby Pueblo, Colo., the old rails are 80-foot lengths that are bolted together, giving the train its characteristic "clickety-clack" ride.

The new rails — which are made in that same but now-modernized mill — are 1/4-mile-long sections welded together into a continuous rail that provides a quieter, faster ride.

For most Southwest Chief riders speed isn't the attraction. Rather, it's the largely hassle-free world of traveling by train. There's no invasive security checks, no constant reminders to avoid congregating near the restrooms, no other drivers checking their cell phones and drifting across lanes.

The trains instead are filled with riders free to move around, to walk the aisles and to watch the country roll past through large windows while waiting for their dining-car reservations. Among the most frequent riders are Mennonites who don't fly, retirees experiencing the country at a slower pace, and Canadians exploring their southern neighbor.

Wes Smith said he, his wife and their two kids decided to take the train home from a family trip to Ohio. Even though it would take them much longer, he said it was worth it.

"It's a chance to see the countryside and make it memorable, instead of the hustle and bustle of flying." Smith said as his son, Rafe, peered out the train window at the rising sun.

As the train rolled on, conductor Billy Ray Pearson made the next station announcement: "Amtrak Train #3, the Southwest Chief, next station stop, La Junta. La Junta, Colo. will be next."

Beneath the train, the new rails sang a different, quieter song. Workers had installed them the day before, and the Southwest Chief sailed along smoothly. The communities it serve hope to qualify for one more federal grant to complete the track work and restore the service to its glory days at high speed, possibly including a new stop in the historic Colorado town of Pueblo.

When the work is complete, the Southwest Chief will make its run 100 minutes faster than it does today. Longtime rail enthusiasts may miss the rhythm of the steel wheels rolling over the tracks. But at least for now they don't have to worry about losing the train entirely.

STATE BY STATE
Home
Boston Globe (MA) - Despite cold-weather woes, T says it’s ready for winter season
January 5, 2016
Laura Crimaldi

State transportation officials on Tuesday defended their winter preparations on MBTA subway and commuter rail lines after track failures caused a train to derail and resulted in service interruptions on the Red Line as temperatures dropped to their lowest since last February.

Transportation Secretary Stephanie Pollack blamed the track breakdowns on the cold but said a full investigation has been launched to determine why a section of track on the Haverhill commuter line shattered as a train carrying a conductor and an engineer passed by early Tuesday.

Pollack said the track problems there and along the Red Line at Savin Hill and Central Square stations do not signal a failure of the state’s efforts to improve service after last year’s record-breaking snowfall pushed the subway and commuter rail networks to the brink.

“I don’t want people to think because we had these unfortunate disruptions today that it means that the winter preparations are not going to result in a better commute,” Pollack said at a news conference.

“I want people to understand that being prepared for winter does not mean there will be no service disruption whatsoever,” she said.

The problems coincided with two developments that rile commuters: the discussion of fare hikes to fix the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority’s operating budget problems and the first bitter cold of 2016.

The temperature in Boston plunged to a low of 8 degrees Tuesday morning for the first time since Feb. 24, said Kevin Cadima, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Taunton. The mercury inched its way up to the mid-20s later in the day, he said.

Last winter’s chronic transit problems prompted Governor Charlie Baker to establish an $83.7 million “winter resiliency plan” to fix infrastructure, upgrade snow removal and deicing equipment, and improve transit operations during severe weather.

Baker, the MBTA, and other state transportation officials cited these efforts at a series of public announcements as winter approached.

Despite these preparations, commuter rail operator Keolis had the first train derailment the state has seen in years on its hands by 3:30 a.m. Tuesday.

That’s when 30 feet of track failed on the Haverhill Line near the Andover-Lawrence border, causing three coach cars to go off the rails as the train headed north at 56 miles per hour, officials said. No passengers were aboard the train and no one was injured, Keolis said.

Franck Dubourdieu, Keolis’s deputy general manager, said the conductor and engineer “did a great job to stop the train,” which was traveling below the speed limit of 60 miles per hour.

“It was not I would say a major derailment, but it was a derailment,” Dubourdieu said.

The derailment caused significant delays and 10 trains were canceled during the morning commute, Keolis said in a statement prepared for its customers.

Other routes west and north of Boston also experienced problems, because the track failure stranded four trains at a facility on the Haverhill Line, said Keolis spokeswoman Leslie Aun.

Shaun Connor, a software engineer from Salem, said he waited for about 20 minutes in the cold after an 8:18 a.m. train on the Newburyport/Rockport Line was canceled without advance notice.

“It was because of the disruption on the Haverhill Line, which shouldn’t have affected me but seemed to have affected everyone,” Connor said. “It’s very frustrating, and this is the very beginning of the winter.”

Service on the Haverhill Line was restored Tuesday afternoon, though the commuter rail reported delays on its Twitter account during the evening commute.

The Federal Railroad Administration said it is investigating. Transit and State Police investigators were also summoned to the scene, though they said there was no evidence of foul play.

Officials said the Haverhill Line was inspected Dec. 19 with technology that uses sound waves to detect flaws in the track.

Routine inspections are done twice weekly, and a third inspection was scheduled for Tuesday because of the cold, Dubourdieu said.

Pollack described the track failures on the Red Line as more typical breaks that can happen in cold weather.

The line was closed for repairs during part of the morning commute between the JFK/UMass and Ashmont stations, and shuttle bus service was put in place. A permanent fix was expected before the Wednesday morning commute, Pollack said.

Shuttle bus service was not needed while the MBTA repaired the track at Central Square, she said.

Prior to winter, the MBTA said it upgraded heaters and replaced third rails along parts of the Red Line’s Braintree branch, where many outages were caused last year by power problems. The Ashmont branch of the line, where Savin Hill Station is located, is due for upgrades next year.

Pollack highlighted ways the readiness plans paid off Tuesday. No signals froze, and Orange Line trains ran smoothly after being stored in tunnels overnight, she said.

That was cold comfort to Jamie Drenel as he tried to get to South Station after the MBTA implemented bus service on the Red Line.

“Wasn’t the T just in the news about how they were going to fix everything?” he asked.

Boston.com - Tuesday’s Red Line, commuter rail issues likely due to cold weather
January 5, 2016
Adam Vaccaro

Rail problems caused a passenger-less commuter rail train to derail overnight, leading to serious delays and cancellations during Tuesday morning’s commute. Another rail issue, this one during rush hour, forced shuttle service along the Red Line’s Ashmont branch. And in the middle of the day, the Red Line saw severe delays due to a broken rail at Central Square.

Welcome back, winter weather. In all three instances, the MBTA believes, sections of rail broke because of cold temperatures.

“The exact cause remains under investigation, but it is believed to be related to the extreme drop in temperatures (from fairly mild to bitterly cold),” MBTA spokesman Joe Pesaturo said in an email. “Such a drop can be very stressful on a running rail.”

After last February’s weather caused deep service issues across the MBTA, the state has not been shy to herald its $83 million “winter resiliency” plan to improve the system’s seasonal performance.

The T faced its first snowfall of the winter last week and saw some issues throughout the day, though weather was not a factor in all of them. (Snow and ice aside, the T’s repair backlog tops $7 billion.)

But Tuesday’s early January deep-freeze—temperatures were between 8 and 15 degrees during the morning rush hour—brought bigger problems to an agency whose leaders have pledged improvement over last winter’s brutal commutes. And it raised fresh questions about how well-prepared the T is to follow through on that promise.

The overnight derailment sent a northbound commuter rail train on the Haverhill line off-track between Andover and Lawrence before passenger service had begun, according to Keolis, the private company that operates the commuter rail for the T.

Typically, when rail breaks, it disrupts the signals, preventing the train from traveling over the broken rail, Secretary of Transportation Stephanie Pollack said in a Tuesday afternoon press conference.

However, because the train was traveling over the rail at the time it broke, three cars were derailed, Keolis Deputy General Manager Franck Dubourdieu said. The train carried two commuter rail employees who were not injured, and was not traveling above the track’s top speed, according to Keolis.

The incident led to canceled and delayed trains north of Boston Tuesday morning, affecting more than just the Haverhill line, Keolis said. The rail was repaired by the afternoon.

On the Red Line, the T switched to bus service around 8 a.m. on the Ashmont branch due to broken rail at Savin Hill. Normal service resumed about two hours later, the T said on Twitter. Later in the day at Central Square, shuttle service was not required, but the problem caused delays in the early afternoon. The broken rail portions on the Red Line were outfitted with equipment “to preserve the integrity of the rail,” until it is permanently replaced overnight, Pesaturo said.

Pollack said the T and Keolis regularly inspect rail for potential breaks during cold weather, with the goal of addressing them before they occur. Still, she said, some rail breaks each year, and Tuesday’s breaks were not the first of the season.

“The commuter rail actually experienced one in Plymouth earlier this winter, and it didn’t disrupt service, so folks don’t know about it,” Pollack said.

She said ongoing investigations into Tuesday’s incidents would explore whether some portions of rail may be more brittle than others.

Officials ranging from MBTA General Manager Frank DePaola to Gov. Charlie Baker have publicly expressed confidence in the T’s winter preparation this year.

Pollack defended the resiliency plan in the face of Tuesday’s rail problems, and said aspects of the response to the morning’s issues—including communication with customers, prepared bus service for the Red Line, and relatively quick fixes to the rails—marked improvements over last year’s debacle.

That may not be much solace to riders who in the new year again found themselves facing rush hour delays and cancellations because of winter weather. Pollack cautioned Tuesday that the season is unlikely to be without its commuting blemishes.

“I want people to understand that being prepared for winter does not mean that there will be no service disruptions whatsoever,” she said.


Hartford Courant (CT) - Crews Prepare For Next Phase Of Hartford Line Construction
January 5, 2016
Don Stacom

WALLINGFORD — Two short towers rise from a vacant lot on North Cherry Street and miles of newly graded rail bed run parallel to Route 5 far into North Haven, all signs that the long-planned Hartford Line is coming.

Heavy construction has been underway since last year, and work crews are getting ready to install a second set of tracks when the weather improves.

"Amtrak wants to get to work [putting down rails] in the spring. There's a lot more work out here to be done," John Bernick of the state Department of Transportation told Lt. Gov. Nancy Wyman on Tuesday when she toured the site of Wallingford's proposed new station.

After decades of political discussions followed by financing debates and engineering studies, Connecticut and Amtrak are stepping up the pace of progress on the New Haven to Hartford to Springfield commuter rail line.

After negotiating with Amtrak and federal rail regulators for most of last year, Gov. Dannel P. Malloy in December announced a deal for Connecticut to put an additional $135 million into the project. In exchange, Amtrak — which owns the 62-mile rail bed and is performing the construction — pledged to hold to a new budget of about $574 million and a firm deadline to be ready for service by January 2018.

"Can you make it faster?" Wyman asked state Transportation Commissioner James Redeker.

"We got it about as good as we could," he replied.

Wallingford, Berlin and Meriden will have all-new stations when the trains start running, while Hartford's Union Station and New Haven's State Street Station will get new high-level platforms to accommodate faster boardings. Enfield, North Haven, Newington and West Hartford are also supposed to get stations, but Redeker said there's no schedule for when they will be built.

The DOT is building simple, no-frills stations in Wallingford, Berlin and Meriden, mostly just a series of wind-break walls. They'll have ticket vending machines, electric vehicle charging stations, elevated platforms with heated floors to melt ice and snow, and pedestrian bridges above the tracks so commuters can cross safely from one platform to the other. There will be elevators and stair towers on each side.

The stations will have new parking and video surveillance systems but no restrooms or indoor waiting rooms.

Despite their relative simplicity, the three stations aren't inexpensive: New York-based Judlau Contracting has a nearly $59 million contract to construct them.

It's unclear what Connecticut would spend to build the Enfield, West Hartford, Newington and North Haven stations. Last month, the state authorized more than $20 million in bonding for a series of Hartford Line-related costs, including preliminary engineering for those stations.

Connecticut intends to begin high-frequency commuter service between Hartford and New Haven, where passengers can transfer to Metro-North trains to Fairfield County and New York City.

Amtrak's trains usually make the Hartford to New Haven run in 45 to 50 minutes; Bernick said improvements in the track configuration will cut about six minutes from that time.

The plan is to go from Amtrak's current six daily round trips between New Haven and Springfield to 17 between New Haven and Hartford, with 12 of those running the full length between New Haven and Springfield.

Further track work north of Hartford would eventually allow 25 daily round trips on the full line from Springfield and New Haven, but there is no specific date for when those improvements would be done.

State Senate Minority Leader Len Fasano of North Haven stood alongside Redeker and Wyman as they looked over the Wallingford station construction site. He said he supports the project and believes it will be an economic benefit for towns along the route. But he remains opposed to Malloy's $100 billion, 30-year transportation renewal proposal, saying it's too expensive. Fasano said he opposes new taxes or highway tolls to pay for transportation upgrades.

Tulsa World (OK) - City of Claremore pursuing "quiet zone" status for noisy trains
January 5, 2016
Rhett Morgan

CLAREMORE — Freight trains have been a staple of this nation’s economy since the 1800s.

But their horns can be disconcerting, if not deafening.
 
“City Hall sits about 200 feet from one of the lines (Union Pacific),” Assistant City Manager Dave Brown said. “We have to stop city council meetings several times. When it comes through, you can’t talk. It’s that loud.”

A more peaceful work environment could be in the offing.

City officials want to improve safety at highway grade railroad crossings, a move that could place Claremore in a “quiet zone” by early 2017, Brown said.

A quiet zone is a segment of rail line where the locomotive’s horn is not routinely sounded at highway grade crossings. In these areas, supplemental safety measures are installed at grade crossings as a substitute for a train’s horn.

“This is the first step of a 10-year Master Transportation Plan,” Brown said. “In my view, it was a low-hanging fruit because we hadn’t read the regulation in a while, and we didn’t know how much we already had as far as safety measures.

“We’re hoping that this is huge step in the right direction that gives some relief to the citizens, but also tourists as they come through and our hotels as they book rooms.”
Oklahoma Highways 20, 66 and 88 serve the city, and two railways disect it — the BNSF and Union Pacific. More than 30 trains pass through Claremore daily, halting traffic, slowing emergency vehicle response times and creating noise.

To qualify as a quiet zone, the city would have to meet a series of Federal Railroad Administration requirements, the minimum of which is the installation of single-gate safety arms at all the municipality’s 18 highway-grade crossings, Brown said.

The city is one crossing short of meeting that requirement — BNSF line at Country Club Road — and municipal officials are waiting for the railway to give them a quote on that installation.

In the meantime, Claremore is considering traffic “channelization,” which entails building thin, 100-foot-long or so medians between lanes that lead up to a crossing. City officials met about a month ago with BNSF and UP representatives, who advocate such measures to deter motorists from circumventing safety gates.

“It’s valued very high on their risk factors,” Brown said. “For us, thankfully, it’s one of the cheaper solutions.”

The city is considering “channelization” at 8-10 intersections, he said. The Railroad Administration, railways and Oklahoma Department of Transportation will pore over the city’s plan and inspect the targeted crossings at a diagnostic review scheduled Feb. 18.

If the proposal is approved, construction on the approaches to the crossings could take place in the ensuing months, with final quiet zone approval achieved from the federal authority — the city hopes — by early 2017, Brown said.

“It’s a ‘quieter’ zone,” he said. “It’s not a guarantee. Every engineer on every train, if they see an unsafe act … they still have the obligation to blow their horn.

“Our goal, obviously, would be reducing 90 to 95 percent of the horn-blowing that happens with two train lines and 30 trains a day.”

Coloradoan - Fort Collins continues train horn noise mitigation efforts
January 5, 2016
Darin Atteberry

Trains are a part of life here in Fort Collins, and sometimes that presents unique challenges. For years, the city has been working to address train-related issues including safety, horn noise and blocked intersections.

The City Council has worked diligently with the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) in recent years to open lines of communication and bring this issue to the forefront. Our goal is to create a safe, pleasant environment for our residents and visitors to enjoy. In downtown Fort Collins, this includes living with trains and train horn noise.

As part of the process of addressing train horn noise, at the recommendation of the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) the city applied for a waiver to a provision of the FRA’s train horn noise rule. The waiver attempted to eliminate a gate requirement at rail grade intersections, which is part of the federal rule for a location to qualify as a “quiet zone.”

Recently, the FRA denied the city’s request for the waiver due to safety concerns. FRA officials prefer physical barriers that prevent drivers from crossing in front of oncoming trains. City analysis indicated Mason Street does not have adequate space for safe gate installation in the downtown corridor.

Safety is our top priority for the city, and we don’t believe quiet zones would jeopardize this. A quiet zone is a common step for communities to reduce train horn noise. With the $4 million invested in safety infrastructure on Mason Street that came with MAX, we believe the corridor will remain safe.

We made the request after careful analysis of the risk of traffic accidents in downtown Fort Collins. Mason Street meets the FRA standards, according to our analysis of historical safety records and existing safety infrastructure. Staff works hard to maintain a safe environment in downtown Fort Collins.

So, what’s next? The Department of Transportation (DOT) is forming a Fort Collins Working Group designed to create solutions for the downtown train horn noise; city staff will participate to represent Fort Collins. We are hopeful that this Working Group produces a solution that works for all.

Council and staff are also working with our Congressional delegation and others nationally on a reexamination of the Train Horn Noise Rule and the overall waiver process used by FRA. We appreciate the engagement and support of the city’s Congressional delegation on railroad-related issues and we thank them for those efforts.

And thank you for your patience and support as we work through this important issue together to find a safe solution that will work for everyone.

New York Times - Cuomo Revives Long-Stalled Plan to Add Track to L.I.R.R.
January 5, 2016
Emma G. Fitzsimmons

In his latest proposal to improve the region’s infrastructure, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Tuesday he wants to jump-start a long-stalled plan to expand a key stretch of the Long Island Rail Road.

The plan, which would add a track to part of the Main Line, would increase the number of trains serving the system, and would, the governor said, deliver a boost to Long Island’s economy.

Speaking to a business group at a breakfast in Nassau County, Mr. Cuomo said more reliable rail service would lure more drivers out of their cars and onto mass transit and that would in turn ease congestion on Long Island’s roads.

“We can make mass transit more attractive, faster, more comfortable,” Mr. Cuomo said in his speech to the Long Island Association. “People will be more willing to come out of their cars and get into the trains, which is exactly what we have to do.”

The proposed third track, which would run between Floral Park and Hicksville, has been discussed for decades. But it has faced opposition from residents along the route, and it is estimated to cost at least $1 billion.

In announcing his effort to move the plan forward, the governor said several million dollars would be spent to start the process, but he did not explain how he intended to finance the cost of constructing an additional track.

The Long Island Rail Road, the nation’s busiest commuter rail line, is part of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which the governor controls. The authority’s five-year capital plan does not include money for the proposed additional track.

In his second term, Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, has made transportation projects a central part of his agenda, embracing infrastructure as an important part of his legacy and invoking the efforts of the influential public works builder Robert Moses. The governor has championed the new Tappan Zee Bridge, promised a rebuilt La Guardia Airport, pledged to fund the authority’s $29 billion capital plan and, after a bit of acrimony, thrown the state’s support behind a new Hudson River rail tunnel.

But as the list of expensive projects grows, many of the details about how they will be financed have not been disclosed, or in some cases even decided.

The governor announced the plan as part of a series of events leading up to his State of the State speech next week. A range of groups representing commuters, the construction industry and transportation planners praised the proposal, saying it would reduce bottlenecks on the railroad while allowing more trains to travel from New York City to Long Island for people making the reverse commute.

The authority’s current capital plan is still awaiting the approval of state leaders, but officials at the authority said the project could be added to the plan in the future. Republican leaders in the State Senate have recently pushed for more money for upstate roads and bridges in order to approve the capital plan.

While the third track was the most significant part of Mr. Cuomo’s announcement on Tuesday, it was not the only big idea he was floating for Long Island. He resurrected the long-debated idea of building a tunnel for cars to travel under the Long Island Sound to the Bronx, Westchester County or Connecticut. Mr. Cuomo proposed spending $5 million to study the feasibility of such a crossing.

Asked by a reporter whether the tunnel was a pipe dream, Mr. Cuomo responded by asking if plans like the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and the George Washington Bridge were pipe dreams.

“Was the Empire State Building a pipe dream?” Mr. Cuomo said. “Was the Freedom Tower a pipe dream? We have to think bold.”

For at least three decades, officials have debated adding a track on the Long Island Rail Road’s Main Line, with often vehement opposition from some residents over train noise, disruption during construction and the acquisition of homes and businesses.

Mr. Cuomo said the new plan envisions a somewhat shorter track, which would help reduce the number of properties that would need to be acquired, at least in part, for the project.

In 2008, an earlier version of the plan was delayed because the authority did not have the money to pay for it.

Leaders on Long Island had varied reactions on Tuesday. The Suffolk County executive, Steve Bellone, a Democrat, said he supported the third-track proposal, arguing that it would improve the region’s economy.

But Edward P. Mangano, the Nassau County executive, a Republican who represents the area where the track would be added, took a more cautious tone.

“The M.T.A.’s prior proposal displaced too many homeowners, and we look forward to learning how this plan differs from that of the past,” Mr. Mangano said in a statement.

Thomas Tweedy, the mayor of Floral Park, said he had not seen the specific proposal yet, but he did not like the sound of it. He raised concerns about the authority’s ability to complete big projects in a timely manner and the problems construction could cause in his community.

“We thought this was dead and buried,” Mr. Tweedy said.

Separately, Mr. Cuomo on Tuesday pledged $300 million for the state’s environmental protection fund for the next fiscal year. The allotment for the fund, which pays for environmental projects, would be an increase from recent years.

Progressive Railroading - Wisconsin DOT allocates $31 million for freight-rail projects
January 5, 2016

The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) will award more than $31 million for seven freight-rail improvement projects in the state, Gov. Scott Walker announced yesterday.

Of that total, WisDOT will distribute more than $24 million through the Freight Railroad Preservation Program (FRPP). Grants issued under the program cover up to 80 percent of project costs to help preserve freight-rail service or rehabilitate track on publicly-owned rail lines, WisDOT officials said in a press release.

WisDOT will provide the remaining $7 million through the state's Freight Railroad Infrastructure Improvement Program (FRIIP), which is a revolving loan program used to improve rail infrastructure and construct new rail-served facilities. 

The grants and loans are aimed at increasing the use of rail transportation and supporting economic development and job creation, WisDOT officials said.

Wisconsin and Southern Railroad Co. (WSOR) is one of the recipients. The short-line railroad will receive awards for four projects:
• a $2.5 million FRPP grant and a $318,000 FRIIP loan to replace existing 85- and 90-pound rail with 115-pound continuously welded rail on 2.4 miles of track in Prairie du Chien;
• an FRPP grant worth nearly $3 million and a $372,300 FRIIP loan to replace ties and perform resurfacing on 45.5 miles of track between Avoca and Crawford;
• an $8 million FRPP grant and $1 million FRIIP loan to implement the second phase of a multi-year project to rehabilitate 41.25 miles of track between Waukesha and Milton; and
• a $10 million FRPP grant and a $1.3 million FRIIP loan to replace several of the spans on a bridge located near Spring Green.

The city of New London will receive a $384,000 FRPP grant to rehabilitate a city-owned industrial spur that is connected to a CN branch line in Outagamie County. That project calls for replacing 1,100 ties and adding 900 tons of ballast to 1 mile of track. Reactivating the spur track will allow Granite Valley Forest Products to ship hardwood logs by rail instead of by truck, according to WisDOT.

Additionally, the Rio Creek Feed Mill will receive a $1.5 million loan to construct a grain bin, dryer and conveying equipment at its Luxemburg facility, while the Country Visions Co-Op will receive a $2.65 million FRIIP loan to construct two rail spurs and a 9,000-ton dry fertilizer plant in Valders. Both facilities are on CN-served rail lines.
3


