 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 5, 2016
TV & RADIO
15 Train Cars Carrying Grain Derails	2
FRA Discovers Probable Cause of Attica Derailment	2
Quiet the Trains!	2
Train Horns – A Sound We Can do without!	2
Railroad Bridge Shut Down for 6 Month Renovation	2
Semi-Truck Stuck Under Railroad Bridge	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Reuters - Exclusive: Norfolk Southern customers lobby regulator against CP bid	2
PTC
WNPR (CT) - Gov. Malloy Touts Connecticut's Progress on Transportation Infrastructure	4
RAIL INCIDENTS
KSBY (CA) - One person hit and killed by Amtrak train in San Luis Obispo	5
Palm Beach Post - Tri-Rail train splits garbage truck in Lake Worth; 22 hurt	5
The Daily Iberian (LA) - Nearly 2 weeks later, remembering	7
WLFI (IN) - FRA releases probable cause of Attica train derailment	8
Newswest 9 (TX) - Truck collides with train in early morning accident	9
KCTV 5 (KS) - Union Pacific train derails in Linn County, KS	10
The Sacramento Bee - Woman hit by freight train in Sacramento identified	10
The News Tribune (WA) - Officials identify man killed by Amtrak train in Sumner	10
CROSSING NEWS
KFOR (OK) - ‘It’s so loud, it’s painful,’ Railroad crossings near downtown are getting a makeover	11
STATE BY STATE

The CT Mirror (CT) - Massive rail plan leaves Connecticut hopeful but mystified	12
The Roanoke Times - Excursion train could roll in 2 years through Roanoke	16
The Almanac (CA) - Atherton considering railroad quiet zone	17
The State Journal Register (IL) - Land acquistion for Springfield rail relocation continues while funding search goes on	18


TV & RADIO
Home
15 Train Cars Carrying Grain Derails
KCTV-KC (CBS) - Kansas City, MO

FRA Discovers Probable Cause of Attica Derailment
WLFI (CBS) - Lafayette, IN

Quiet the Trains!
KFOR-OKC (NBC) - Oklahoma City, OK

Train Horns – A Sound We Can do without!
KFDM (CBS) - Beaumont, TX

Railroad Bridge Shut Down for 6 Month Renovation
WXXV (FOX) - Biloxi, MS

Semi-Truck Stuck Under Railroad Bridge
WITI-MILW (FOX) - Milwaukee, WI

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Reuters - Exclusive: Norfolk Southern customers lobby regulator against CP bid
January 4, 2016
Nick Carey

Industry groups representing major freight customers of Norfolk Southern Corp have asked the U.S. rail regulator to reject any bid for the railroad by Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd, according to letters viewed by Reuters.

The opposition from a broad array of customers to the hostile bid for the Norfolk, Virginia-based railroad could significantly harm Canadian Pacific's case if an expected lengthy proxy battle is resolved and a merger reaches the Surface Transportation Board for a review.

The Canadian company in mid-November disclosed its $28 billion offer to buy Norfolk Southern. It would be the first merger involving a U.S. railroad since the Surface Transportation Board rewrote the rules in 2001 after a wave of consolidation reduced the number of major North American railroads to seven from 35.

The proposed merger could face a tough review, and the regulator is expected to give customers even more time than in the past to air concerns at public hearings.

Norfolk Southern has rebuffed several bids from Canadian Pacific since November.

The letters have not been made public but copies were viewed by Reuters. Sent in December, they express concerns over Canadian Pacific's plans to cut costs at Norfolk Southern would hurt service levels and that a merger would lead to a continental duopoly meaning higher prices for customers.

Norfolk Southern declined to comment on the letters.

A Canadian Pacific spokesman said the company "is aware of some shipper concerns" but looks forward to discussing the benefits of its bid with all stakeholders.

The documents also include letters from representatives of several state legislatures expressing opposition to the deal.

The letters include a joint one to Canadian Pacific, with the Surface Transportation Board carbon-copied, from the heads of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and the Association of Global Automakers - which between them represent large automakers and suppliers including General Motors Co and Toyota Motor Corp.

A large proportion of finished vehicles travel most of the way by train from U.S. manufacturing plants to dealerships.

"(P)revious rail mergers of this magnitude have been followed by pro-longed periods of poor service levels and higher rates," the joint letter dated Dec. 22 states. "We urge CP to abandon its merger ambitions and to focus its attentions upon enhancing its current levels of customer service."

Major rail mergers in the 1990s, such as the 1999 carve-up of Conrail between Norfolk Southern and CSX Corp resulted in short-term collapses as railroads failed to integrate their networks smoothly.

In a separate letter, Subaru Motor Co said it opposed a merger "as we believe it would limit the competitive balance" among North America's railroads.

The manufacturers' associations of Kentucky, Indiana and West Virginia also wrote to the STB, as did the Michigan Agri-Business Association and the Palmetto AgriBusiness Council (PABC), which represents farmers, banks and agricultural investors in South Carolina.

"We are justifiably concerned that Canadian Pacific’s proposal to slash resources available to the current Norfolk Southern threatens the economy of our state," Charles Higdon, chief executive of the Kentucky Association of Manufacturers, wrote to the STB on Dec. 22.

In a letter dated Dec. 8, Ernie Thrasher, CEO of Xcoal Energy & Resources, wrote he was "concerned that the short-term nature of CP's operating plan would be detrimental to the long-term requirements of the U.S. coal industry and energy sector."

In a Dec. 23 letter to the STB, the head of short line railroad holding company Watco cautioned that many in the rail industry expect the next round of mergers will be the last.

"The proposed CP-NS merger likely would result in a national duopoly, which would dramatically reduce competitive rail options for customers," Watco CEO Rick Webb wrote.

PTC
Home
WNPR (CT) - Gov. Malloy Touts Connecticut's Progress on Transportation Infrastructure
January 4, 2016
Heather Brandon

Connecticut made "far more progress than anyone ever expected" in 2015 on improving the state's transportation infrastructure, Governor Dannel Malloy said on Monday.

Malloy made the announcement to reporters at Hartford's Union Station alongside Department of Transportation Commissioner James Redeker.

Malloy said the state has pushed forward on its goals laid out in his 30-year plan unveiled in 2015, called "Let's Go CT." The plan targets repairs for aging infrastructure in a transportation system has been neglected for decades.

"We are moving aggressively to provide Connecticut’s residents and businesses with a best-in-class transportation system," Malloy said in a statement. "The future of our state depends on it – and 2015 was a success. We moved the ball down the field on this critical issue."

One project Malloy highlighted is the replacement of the I-84 elevated, two-mile portion of highway in Hartford. The project is being evaluated now and the state is considering design alternatives, with the lastest cost estimates ranging from $4.3 to $12.1 billion.

Malloy also noted track and bridge construction underway for the Hartford Line, set to begin enhanced service in early 2018. The line will increase train service between New Haven, Hartford, and Springfield. Four train stations are under construction and a new signal system will be installed, including the automated safety mechanism known as Positive Train Control.

Malloy touted as well the early completion of the Q Bridge in New Haven, improvements to Metro-North's New Haven Line, and the launch of CTfastrak in the Hartford area.

One of the governor's top priorities for 2016 is the so-called transportation lockbox, a proposed constitutional amendment that would ensure any money earmarked for transportation projects is used solely for that purpose.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
KSBY (CA) - One person hit and killed by Amtrak train in San Luis Obispo
January 4, 2016
Audrey Liviakis

One person was hit and killed by an Amtrak train in San Luis Obispo Monday night at around 9:00 p.m. at Tank Farm Road and the train overpass.

San Luis Obispo Police Department responded along with San Luis Obispo Fire Department and CALFIRE. Investigators were on scene, trying to determine the identity of the person, and what happened.

Authorities would not confirm more information at this time. For updates, check ksby.com and our morning newscasts.

Palm Beach Post - Tri-Rail train splits garbage truck in Lake Worth; 22 hurt
January 4, 2016
Lulu Ramadan and Julius Whigham II

LAKE WORTH — Update on Jan. 5 at 8 a.m.: Some Tri-Rail routes are delayed up to 10 minutes Tuesday as a result of Monday’s crash, spokeswoman Bonnie Arnold said.

Original story: A disabled city garbage truck was split in half Monday morning after a Tri-Rail train hit it near Sixth Avenue.

The garbage truck stalled on the tracks just before 7 a.m. The driver was able to escape it just before the train struck, the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office reports.

The northbound train, carrying between 80 to 90 passengers, smashed into the cab of the garbage truck, carrying the rear of the truck some 300 yards before the train came to a full stop.

Passengers say they were jolted forward by the impact. Twenty-two passengers were taken to the hospital with minor injuries, said Capt. Albert Borroto, of Palm Beach County Fire Rescue.

Debris from the devastated garbage truck littered the roadway and railroad tracks just after the crash.

The front Tri-Rail car was completely derailed and tilted slightly on its side when investigators arrived.

The passengers were evacuated from the train and moved onto buses at about 8 a.m.

The crash caused substantial delays to Tri-Rail routes through the day, said Bonnie Arnold, Tri-Rail’s public information officer.

“There was significant damage to the tracks and the signal system,” Arnold said at about 9 a.m. “We have a crane on the way, but it’s going to take several hours to get back there.”

The crash also caused significant damage to the tilted cab car.

In order to continue routes, people were transported by bus around the derailed train from station to station before continuing by Tri-Rail.

“Some routes were delayed as much as two hours,” Arnold said. “Some routes were canceled altogether.”

Frustrated passengers on board an Amtrak train traveling from New York reported being stranded Monday night near West Palm Beach as a result of the crash.

Amtrak Train 97 from New York to Miami was stopped about 4:45 p.m. while its crew waited for the railroad to be cleared, an Amtrak spokeswoman said. The tracks were cleared and service resumed at about 8 p.m. with 182 passengers on board, she said.

Some passengers said they were frustrated because little information was provided during the wait.

“(There’s been) no communication, none of the staff comes out. We’re just sitting here like sitting ducks,” said Diane Tavares, a former New York resident who recently relocated to South Florida.

The pieces of the garbage truck were collected and taken to a city yard for further investigation, said Lake Worth City Manager Michael Bornstein. It isn’t clear why the truck stalled on the tracks.

The driver tried starting the garbage truck — worth about $150,000 — several times while the guard gates were going up and down, Bornstein said. He was able to get out of the truck “just in time.”

“We’re very appreciative and happy that he was unhurt and that no one was seriously injured or killed,” Bornstein said. “As we go through the investigation, we will learn more about what happened.”

The Daily Iberian (LA) - Nearly 2 weeks later, remembering
January 4, 2016
Corey Vaughn

COTEAU — The deaths of five people after a train-car collision on Dec. 22 reverberated throughout the Teche Area as a tragedy.

Six people, all of New Iberia, were inside a 2006 Ford Taurus that evening on a railroad track located on Louisiana 88, according to a prepared statement from Louisiana State Police. Heavy rainfall pounded every vehicle traveling in the area.

At the same time, Train 2 of the Sunset Limited Service was traveling from Los Angeles to New Orleans on the same railroad track. Amtrak Spokesman Andy Shulz said the train collided with the vehicle at approximately 5:50 p.m.

The impact killed three of the occupants on scene. Casualties included 70-year-old Phyllis LeBlanc, who was driving the vehicle, 12-year-old Trinity Schmidt and 12-year-old Jayla Daigle

Chase Day, 12, died on Christmas Day in a Baton Rouge hospital and 49-year-old Stephen LeBlanc died Dec. 26.

Schulz said the train sustained damage that was repaired after the crash at the Amtrak station in New Iberia. The train proceeded to its New Orleans destination, where it arrived approximately four hours and eight minutes late, Shulz said.

The days that followed were filled with grief among family and friends of the victims. 

Alaina Colson, a friend of Schmidt’s mother, had known the 12-year-old all her life. Colson started a Gofundme account to help Schmidt’s family alleviate the family’s expenses and remembered Schmidt as a kind girl who was full of energy.

“There was never a dull moment with her,” Colson said while holding back tears in a phone interview Thursday morning. “I’m going to miss seeing that beautiful smile on her face.”

Colson said Schmidt attended Daspit Elementary School where she had “very good grades.” Schmidt also played clarinet for the school’s band.

According to an obituary, Day also attended Daspit Elementary School band and played trumpet in the band.

Day was the winner of the 2015 Pierre C. Shadeaux essay contest, an annual competition held by The Daily Iberian that honors the best essays submitted by students about Cajun Groundhog Day. Day was honored for the contest in February and read his essay to the crowd, which included New Iberia Mayor Hilda Curry and Iberia Parish President Romo Romero.

Day’s twin brother, who also was in the vehicle, is the only survivor of the train-car crash collision

Daigle was also in the school band’s, according to her obituary, as a clarinet player. According to her obituary, she loved hunting, fishing with her father, gymnastics, cheerleading and late night chats with her mother.

This is not the first crash at the location. The grade crossing at Louisiana 88 leads to a traffic sign at Louisiana 182. Although lights and arms are present when an incoming train crosses the intersection, vehicles can stop on the tracks during a red light.

A total of 13 train-car crash reports are listed by the Federal Railway Administration for the railroad crossing, not counting the latest wreck. Of those, three reports are listed in which drivers involved in a collision were killed.

The Daily Iberian reported in 2004 that a crash occurring in 2002 involved former Aggreko CEO Phillip Harrower. Harrower’s family subsequently filed a wrongful death lawsuit blaming the crash on mistakes by Amtrak crew members and unsafe conditions at the crossing.

According to the FRA accident report, Harrower was killed when he tried to beat the train and collided with nine of the cars. The report stated the train was traveling at 68 mph.

As recent as 2012, a crash was reported that was caused by a vehicle stopping on the tracks before the gates descended. That freight train was traveling 40 mph at the time, and the report lists no one inside the vehicle when the collision occurred.

WLFI (IN) - FRA releases probable cause of Attica train derailment
January 4, 2016

ATTICA, Ind. (WLFI) — Federal Railroad Administration released a probable cause for the Attica train derailment blaming it on defective or missing crossties.

The train derailed late Saturday night damaging several cars and closing US 41 for hours, however no one was injured.

Norfolk Southern officials told News 18 earlier Monday that the derailment was under investigation and they had no known cause, but the FRA report was dated back to Sunday.

Attica Mayor Duane Roderick said he’s concerned because this is not the first derailment in the area.

“I’m concerned with is that its not the first derailment that’s happened in that area,” said Roderick. “I don’t know if it is the track itself, I don’t know if that’s something that could be improved, but I’m not an expert on it but that would be a concern.”

Newswest 9 (TX) - Truck collides with train in early morning accident
January 4, 2016
Mary Coleman

Amarillo, TX -   An early morning vehicle vs. train accident has left one Amarillo man in the hospital with life-threatening injuries.

The roar of the horn and the lights at the railroad crossing gate in the 1200 block of McMasters proved to be not enough at 1:00 a.m. Monday morning.

Amarillo Police were called out after a motor vehicle struck a train.

"No apparent signs of any skid marks or anything like that, just literally drove into the side of the train," says Cpl. Jerry Neufeld.

When they arrived,they found a mangled Dodge driven by 42-year-old Bryan Henley. Henley apparently drove through a railroad crossing gate arm and struck a westbound train.

Crews had to use jaws of life to extract him from the vehicle. Officers say speed and alcohol are indeed factors in the crash.

"I think it's very unusual where in this case it struck. It wasn't like the individual was trying to get around the crossing guard and the arms and that kind of thing," says Neufeld.

And this isn't the first incident of this type  for this intersection. Years ago, three people were killed under the same circumstances.

So...will this mean changes to crossings any time soon?

"There's not a lot else you can do, I mean there's flashing lights, the arms are down, those lights are flashing as well. It's very evident and if you've driven a car for any length of time, you know that's a crossing guard and we're supposed to stop and wait for those crossing arms to go back up, for that train to clear the intersection and you could proceed through," says Neufeld.

While APD says they are hoping for the best in that Henley heals quickly, they also tell us DUI charges are indeed possible.


KCTV 5 (KS) - Union Pacific train derails in Linn County, KS
January 4, 2016
Dave Eckert

LINN COUNTY, KS (KCTV) -
The Linn County Rural Fire Department and EMS crews are on the scene of a train derailment in Linn County, KS.

Authorities say ten cars of a 166-car Union Pacific train came off the tracks Monday afternoon. Many wound up on their side. Crews believe, but have not confirmed, that the cars were carrying grain.

The accident occurred south of Park and Goodrich, KS near 1700 Road and County Road 1077.

There were no injuries, and although the train was carrying hazardous materials, they were not involved in the derailment.

The train was heading to Fort Worth, Texas from North Platte, Nebraska.

The Sacramento Bee - Woman hit by freight train in Sacramento identified
January 4, 2016
Bill Lindelof

The woman killed last week when she was struck by a freight train has been identified by the Sacramento County Coroner’s Office.

Marjorie Holmes, 69, of Sacramento was struck Tuesday afternoon by a Union Pacific train on Power Inn Road north of Fruitridge Road in Sacramento.

A spokesman for UP said an investigation indicated that Holmes was hit about 1 p.m. while she was walking parallel to the railroad tracks on the crossing pad. All crossing signals were working properly, the railroad said.

The train was en route from Roseville to Fresno.

The News Tribune (WA) - Officials identify man killed by Amtrak train in Sumner
January 4, 2016
Stacia Glenn

A 53-year-old man struck and killed by an Amtrak train in Sumner Saturday has been identified as Michael P. Tortorete.

Tortorete lived near the tracks where the accident occurred at the Zehnder Street crossing north of downtown.

It’s unclear what he was doing on the tracks when a southbound train hit him about 10 a.m.

It was the first train accident of the year. There were 27 train fatalities in Washington in 2015, BNSF Railway spokesman Gus Melonas said.

CROSSING NEWS
Home
KFOR (OK) - ‘It’s so loud, it’s painful,’ Railroad crossings near downtown are getting a makeover
January 4, 2016
Lacey Lett

OKLAHOMA CITY - Twelve railroad crossings near downtown are getting a makeover.

"It's painful. It's so loud that it's painful when you're out on the patio trying to enjoy yourself and then this blaring train comes through."

Hilbilly Po' Boys is no more than 10 feet from train tracks on NW 9th street near Broadway.

They say the loud sound of the horn affects their customers.

And they're not the only ones ready for the blaring noise to go away.

The City of Oklahoma City approved an almost $4 million project to quiet the trains.

It was supposed to be complete by the end of 2015.

"There was a step in between Lacey where we had to go to the Corporation Commission to get their approval to do this, and that is just process and process takes time," Meg Salyer,  city councilperson for Ward 6 said.

According to the Federal Railroad Administration engineers must sound warning whistles at least 15 seconds and not more than 20 seconds in advance of all crossings.

The new multimillion dollar plan will make certain tracks safer for drivers.

"We are working with three different levels of closing those at grade crossings to close or seal off the corridor.

Here's how it will work:

* Five crossings will be closed completely including 15th, 14th, and 12th streets.
* 10th street will have a quad gate.
* Five streets will have medians to make it impossible for cars to try to get around the tracks.
* The silencing of the blaring horns can't come soon enough for Ferris O’Brien, owner of the Spy radio station and downtown resident.
"It seems like there's no reason behind it. Each conductor blows their horn a certain way," O’Brien said.

Once construction on the railroads is complete, it has to be approved by the Federal Railroad Commission.

 
STATE BY STATE
Home
The CT Mirror (CT) - Massive rail plan leaves Connecticut hopeful but mystified
January 4, 2016
Jan Ellen Spiegel

Nearly four years and $30 million after the Federal Railroad Administration began looking at how to reinvent the Northeast Corridor rail system, there is a proposal. In fact three of them in a nearly 1,000-page environmental impact statement.

NEC Future, as it is called, offers rail improvement choices that range from bare-bones fixes for noted choke points and other problems on the existing line to entire second lines that in Connecticut could re-route historic travel patterns.

It is also prompting a good deal of exasperation from officials, communities and all manner of interest groups in Connecticut, even though many have been begging for an improved rail system for years, if not decades.

“They spent $30 million on this report – it just doesn’t feel like a finished product,” said Joe McGee, vice president for public policy at the Business Council of Fairfield County, who, along with many others, was having difficulty assessing the options because of a lack of details. “It looks more like a response to be rejected than a real option.”

Compounding that core problem are several other issues. The report’s release just before Thanksgiving left about half the comment period, which ends Jan. 30, coinciding with the busy holiday season. Attendance was light at the first of two public information sessions in Connecticut, held 10 days before Christmas in New Haven. The other is January 13 in Hartford. None is scheduled for Fairfield County, where rail is currently most widely used.

Many otherwise interested parties – including leaders of some of the municipalities that would be most affected – were unaware the rail plan even existed. And there is the recognition – noted repeatedly in the document - that Connecticut would come in for many more impacts, including environmental ones, than any state in the 457-mile corridor from Washington, D.C., to Boston.

Those impacts could be so pronounced – taking tens of thousands of additional acres of undeveloped land, farmland and forest and affecting miles of water resources – that some are wondering whether much of the rail plan could do more harm to the environment than the good that would be achieved by getting cars off the road.

There are tradeoffs, said Rebecca Reyes-Alicea, who managed the NEC Future process. ”What we want the public and the stakeholders to understand is this is what it will take to see major improvements in service. Are we ready for it, or not ready for it? Are there intermediate steps we want to take?” she said. “At the end of all of this, it’s intended to define a vision. Do we want a big vision; do we want a small vision?”

But even James Redeker, Connecticut’s transportation commissioner and the chair of the Northeast Corridor Commission that oversaw development of the study, was not sure it provided those affected by it with enough to judge it.

The problem, he said, was the process. This environmental impact statement was not a traditional one that would have provided plans to solve specific problems along with all the relevant environmental, economic and other data, such as, in the case of rail, ridership information. Instead, NEC Future offered rail corridor options consisting of general locations, little detail about what it would take to put the rails there, no service development plan, and a broad price tag - but no funding strategy.

That's not enough for people to make even a conceptual choice, Redeker said, though that is what people are being asked to do.

“How are we supposed to make choices if we don’t know what service we’re going to get and if we don’t know yet if you’re going to turn to us to pay for that, and to what degree?” Redeker said. “I think this is going to be difficult for the public to provide meaningful input on.”

And that includes Redeker. He said he doesn’t yet know how he’ll respond. "If I can’t demonstrate to Connecticut folks that there’s a substantial and documentable and believable return on investment for transportation dollars, you might as well put them somewhere else,” he said.

The plan and the problems

There are three options beyond a no-build option that maintains a “state of good repair,” something even Redeker called a “non-starter.” All three keep and maintain the existing track, even if it’s no longer the primary route.

Option 1, with a capital cost of about $66 billion (none of the costs includes property acquisition), provides Connecticut with upgrades at chokepoints and adds a 50-mile line from Old Saybrook to Kenyon, R.I. The new line would bypass the existing shoreline route, much of which is in flood zones and salt marsh, making it susceptible to climate change and sea level rise.

Option 2, at $136 billion, does not include that bypass, but adds about 30 miles of track between Westport and New Rochelle. The biggest addition would be a route from New Haven to Hartford along the track being revitalized now. But then it continues east from Hartford through Storrs to Providence, merging into the line to Boston.

It would divert a large portion of regional and eventually high-speed rail away from the longstanding shoreline route.

Alternative three, costing as much as nearly $310 billion, contains the most massive changes in Connecticut. In addition to the Option 2 changes, it would add a tunnel under Long Island Sound between central Long Island and Connecticut, joining the New Haven line around Milford. It would add an inland route from New York City running through White Plains, Danbury and Waterbury to Hartford – much of it in tunnels.

From Hartford, in addition to the line to Providence, another would angle off to Worcester and then into Boston.

Even without the massive environmental impact from the rail right-of-way increase (more on that in a minute), the new lines are raising a list of concerns.

In Fairfield County, McGee’s list may be the longest, starting with a simmering tension over differences in philosophy. The NEC Future plan focuses on high-speed rail, finding straighter and flatter routes through Connecticut than the existing winding corridor that keeps train speeds low. That caters more to Amtrak long-distance service and not the eight regional carriers that use the corridor.

McGee and many others around the state are more focused on the commuters served by the regional carriers such as Metro-North. “Getting people to work is really the critical piece. That’s where the ridership is. That’s 125,000 people a day,” he said. “We’re talking workforce competitiveness, and that is tied to commuter rail.”

The Long Island Sound tunnel isn’t thrilling him either. “This is the center of the state’s economy,” he said of Fairfield County. “ And you’re now going to bypass it? We are very concerned that large chunks of Westchester, Fairfield and New Haven Counties would be eliminated from high-speed commuter rail under those two plans. Why would we do that?”

But what’s really stumping him is the New Rochelle to Westport line and its designation as “aerial.” With no real details in the report, which he called “opaque,” he sent a letter to the FRA with questions to help him make an assessment.

He received a one-paragraph form-response:

“Thank you for your comment. Please note that comments received on the Tier 1 Draft EIS during the formal public comment period will be addressed in the Tier 1 Final EIS, anticipated to be released in late 2016. We appreciate your interest in NEC FUTURE.”

“They owe us more information,” he said. “How can you make a choice if you don’t know where the thing is even located?”

At the Capitol Region Council of Governments, Executive Director Lyle Wray was already bristling that his previously stated concerns about the Danbury to Providence link were ignored in the report. He worries that the focus on high-speed rail will effectively de-rail the Northern New England Intercity Rail Initiative – a regional rail plan to reconnect the 1.7 million people in the Hartford-Springfield, Mass., region to the 5 million in metro Boston.

That plan would re-establish a commuter-rail connection from Springfield to Boston along its former route through western Massachusetts.

“When you say ‘let’s just build something from Danbury to Providence’ – never mind how much it costs and how many eminent domain cases you’re going to have to win. It’s unconstrained by funding limits, constructability, environmental and community impacts. Well good luck on that,” he said.

Mayor Mark Boughton of Danbury, who like many others was largely unaware the rail report even existed, called the tunnel-heavy plan for a Danbury-to-Hartford line “absurd.”

“A monorail system on the median of 84 where we already own most of the property makes a lot more sense and would certainly be more cost effective and might actually get built in all of our lifetimes,” he said.

He’d like the Metro North line from Danbury to Norwalk electrified for the many people who use it to commute. “And having a non-stop direct line into Grand Central would be one of the biggest economic development initiatives we can do around here,” he said. Option 3 includes that route.

Sam Gold, executive director of the Lower Connecticut River Valley Council of Governments, RiverCOG, said the problem with the plan is that his region, Middlesex County, was not included among areas that would feel impacts – even though there could be a new rail bridge over the Connecticut River.

“If that’s what’s needed in the future to keep the Northeast corridor running, so be it,” he said. “But they need to be careful to make sure they do as much as possible to minimize or mitigate any impact.”

Paige Bronk, Groton’s manager of economic and community development, was among the few who were not complaining. He said there was enough in the report to help him assess the alternatives and was leaning toward the first one.

“It’s a little bit easier for us,” he conceded. “We know we support the rail line; we know we don’t want to lose our volume, and if anything we want to increase our ridership. We probably have a simpler analysis than maybe some other communities.”

Environmental tradeoffs

The analysis for the environmental community is turning out to be anything but simple.

Long before climate change became the core concern, environmentalists in Connecticut were advocating for better rail as a way to lower air pollution from cars. But after being alerted to the existence of the NEC Future report, most were dismayed at the extent of the environmental impact, especially from Option 3.

Roger Reynolds of Connecticut Fund for the Environment/Save the Sound called the Long Island Sound tunnel a “non-starter.”

“From an environmental perspective, and maybe from other perspectives, it’s just a manifestly bad idea,” he said. “We’re paying a remarkable cost to do remarkable damage to our resources – particularly the Long Island Sound.”

The Roanoke Times - Excursion train could roll in 2 years through Roanoke
January 4, 2016
Jeff Sturgeon

Railroad history advocates have lined up more than 2 miles of track and initial federal clearance to launch a train attraction offering short rides across the city.

Conceived as a way to attract tourists, the train would board passengers near Towers Shopping Center and take them 2 ½ miles northwest to Norwich over an out-of-service freight line once used to haul ice, steel and lumber to local industries.

At Norwich, the train would back up to the starting point for a total trip distance of about 5 miles.

The project is two to three years from launch, but it has the blessing of Norfolk Southern Corp., which intends to donate a portion of its Roanoke Belt Line track for the project, and of federal regulators who gave it tentative clearance last month.
Bev Fitzpatrick, who directs the Virginia Museum of Transportation in Roanoke, said Monday a consortium of railroad heritage groups will need $350,000 to $400,000 for track work before the attraction, to be called Roanoke Southern, leaves the station. Other costs are likely going to be involved, he said.

The Roanoke chapter of the National Railway Historical Society, the Norfolk and Western Historical Society and the O. Winston Link Museum all are represented on the planning committee, which first proposed the project to railroad officials about two years ago, Fitzpatrick said. The Roanoke chapter of the historical society has a working diesel locomotive engine and the expertise to operate a train on the planned Roanoke Southern route. Cars can be lined up, too, he said.

The initiative will increase the city’s draw as a railroad heritage destination if successful, he said. Already, the transportation museum, home to the 611 restored steam engine that has run out-of-town excursion trips, attracts more than 50,000 annual visitors, according to Fitzpatrick, who called the 11-year-old Link museum another major draw. With the Roanoke Southern train project, “We open the door for some additional folks to come to Roanoke and spend their money, which is really what this whole thing is about.”

Susan Terpay, a spokeswoman for Norfolk Southern, confirmed Monday that the railroad is “in the process” of donating track to the project. The Surface Transportation Board, the economic regulator of railroading, confirmed Dec. 23 that the Roanoke Southern group is planning an intrastate excursion train exempt from its regulation; as long as no one files a credible objection by Jan. 8, the parties can go forward with the planned gift of track to Roanoke Southern LLC, an arm of the transportation museum, on or after Jan. 17, said Robert Wimbish, an attorney assisting the transportation museum. No objections are expected, he said.

Roanoke Southern would have to meet the safety standards of the Federal Railroad Administration and possibly those of state regulators, Wimbish said.

Many details remain to be determined, including the ticket price. It will likely be higher than the $3 the museum charges for periodic, short local train excursions so that Roanoke Southern can be self-supporting, Fitzpatrick said. Another question is the train’s speed. Wimbish said he is aware of other excursion trains of this type that travel between 5 and 10 mph. The planned route borders the Roanoke River, weaves through industrial tracts and neighborhoods and passes within 50 feet of the Green Goat eatery in Wasena Park, a restaurant with outdoor seating.

“I’m very excited,” Green Goat owner Teal Batson said. “My vision, they would blow the horn and guests would wave.”

The Almanac (CA) - Atherton considering railroad quiet zone
January 4, 2016
Barbara Wood

Atherton plans to hire a consultant this week to help the town make the stretch of the town's railroad tracks near the Fair Oaks Lane crossing into a "quiet zone" where trains could sound their horns only if they encounter a hazard, City Manager George Rodericks said.

The consultants competing for the job were told that their "primary focus" would be "to achieve a Quiet Zone designation for the Fair Oaks Crossing as soon as possible." The town wants the consultant to start working as soon as mid-January, Mr. Rodericks said.

If the quiet zone is adopted, train horns would not sound at the Fair Oaks Lane crossing, but would still sound at the nearby Watkins Avenue crossing.

According to a staff report, the quiet zone would be the first on the Caltrain corridor. There are 36 quiet zones in California, the report says, with nine of them single grade-level railroad crossings as Atherton is proposing.

The move to make the crossing a quiet zone probably would not have come about without the research of Rail Committee member Nerissa Dexter. In October 2014, the town was told by Caltrain "that FRA (Federal Rail Administration) regulations (on quiet zones) typically require at least a 10 year interval with no nearby fatalities, a situation that could not currently be met."

But Ms. Dexter's research found that the Federal Rail Administration does not count deaths by suicide as casualities and does not consider nearby casualties, and in fact listed no casualities in Atherton.

The State Journal Register (IL) - Land acquistion for Springfield rail relocation continues while funding search goes on
January 4, 2016
Tim Landis

The city of Springfield has spent a little more than $1 million to acquire land for rail relocation, even as local officials scramble to find money for the next phase of construction.

Relocation of one longtime business and demolition of another at the Ash Street rail crossing on 10th Street are the latest signs of ongoing negotiations for land to construct a second set of rail underpasses. The first $20 million underpass, at Carpenter Street between Ninth and 11th Streets, is scheduled for completion this summer.

"We still are talking to landowners. We're planning to complete land acquisition by summer," said Kevin Seals, chief environmental engineer for rail-relocation consulting firm Hanson Professional Services of Springfield.

Planners estimate 50 properties -- including businesses, homes and vacant lots -- would be needed for construction of underpasses on the Norfolk Southern rail line at Ash and Laurel streets.

The project hit a major roadblock in October when the U.S. Department of Transportation turned down the city's request for $16 million in rail-improvement funding toward the construction. Another $12 million in funding from the Illinois Department of Transportation was contingent on federal approval. Land-acquisition has proceeded under a formula that reimburses the city of Springfield from federal dollars for upfront purchases of properties along the 10th Street corridor.

According to figures from the city budget office, acquisitions to date total $1,011,736.

O'Connor Mailing Services recently moved from 901 E. Ash St., at the east edge of the rail crossing, to 1025 Junction Circle. The new location is in Justin Park Plaza at MacArthur Boulevard and Wabash Avenue. Efforts to reach the owner were unsuccessful. The former Ash Street Upholstery building at 906 E. Ash St. has been demolished.

"We're aware they are continuing with land acquisition, even though they didn't get the (federal) grant," said Shelly Heideman, executive director of The Faith Coalition for the Common Good.

The advocacy group has backed efforts to assure landowners are fairly represented in the land-acquisition process, including appointment of a rail-relocation ombudsman and a relocation oversight commission. Land-acquisition is governed by federal rules.

Springfield officials' hopes for additional funding have been revived, according to Mayor Jim Langfelder, by the inclusion of $500 million for transportation-improvement grants in a recent federal transportation bill. Illinois has received $290 million from the program since it was started in 2009, according to an announcement of the funding from U.S. Sen Dick Durbin, a Springfield Democrat.

"We are going to apply for those funds," said Langfelder. "We think we will be more successful this time."

Langfelder said city and county officials also are working on a revised agreement with the Illinois Department of Transportation to focus construction funding on the 10th Street rail corridor. Long-term local plans are to move Union Pacific freight trains and Amtrak passenger service from the Third Street corridor to 10th Street.

Where things stand

State and local transportation planners estimate it will take $315 million and at least a decade to relocate Union Pacific and Amtrak trains from the Third Street rail line to the Norfolk Southern rail corridor on 10th Street.

The first major construction, a $20 million underpass at Carpenter Street between Ninth and 11th Streets, is scheduled for completion in 2016.

Land acquisition has begun for underpasses at Ash and Laurel streets, but in October the federal government turned down the city of Springfield's application for $16 million toward construction costs. The city expects to apply for a new round of funding this year.


3


