 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 22, 2016
TV & RADIO
Deadly METRA Accident	1
Train Safety Campaign in RTD Union Station	2
Midnight Rider case continues	2
Police investigating deadly train accident in PA	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Wall Street Journal - Hyperloop Race Picks Up Speed	2
ABC 7 - Elon Musk's Hyperloop Vision Could Be Ready for Passengers by 2018	4
Bloomberg Business - CP Rail's Harrison to Shift Strategy in Norfolk Southern Bid	5
The Hill - Feds tout collection of $15 million in railway fines	6
Occupational Health & Safety - Increased Enforcement Leads to FRA's Highest-Ever Penalty Collection Rate	8
RAIL INCIDENTS
Chicago Sun Times - Freight train derailment causing delays on Metra Rock Island Line	8
Chicago Sun Times - Woman killed when Metra train strikes SUV in Arlington Heights	9
ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
Palm Beach Post - Indian River County to challenge All Aboard water district permits	10
HHFT
Auburn Reporter (NY) - Trains carrying highly flammable shale oil through Auburn raise new public safety concerns	11
METRO NORTH
Lohud (NY) - Crumbling ties cost Metro-North in overtime	14
STATE BY STATE
Arizona Journal - ‘Rail Safety’ Bill Receives Council’s Divided Support	15
Penn Live - Aging Harrisburg train station in line for major improvements, development	17
Pioneer Journal (MN) - Wadena looks to create rail quiet zone through town	19


TV & RADIO
Home
Deadly METRA Accident
WLS-CHI (ABC) - Chicago, IL

Train Safety Campaign in RTD Union Station 
KMGH-DEN (ABC) - Denver, CO

Midnight Rider case continues
WJCL-SAV (ABC) - Savannah, GA

Police investigating deadly train accident in PA
WGAL-HAR (NBC) - Harrisburg, PA

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Wall Street Journal - Hyperloop Race Picks Up Speed
January 21, 2016
Jack Nicas

build a hyperloop transportation system, engineers must create a near-vacuum in miles-long tubes, deploy powerful magnets to suspend capsules on a sliver of air and propel passengers at nearly the speed of sound without making them sick.

Yet that may be the easy part. Backers of two companies racing to build the futuristic transport system insist it is technologically possible. The bigger challenge may be proving it commercially viable, sidestepping the fate of Concorde, the supersonic jet that airlines retired in 2003 because of its high costs.

Billionaire inventor Elon Musk introduced the hyperloop idea in 2013, describing a low-pressure tube in which levitating capsules carry passengers at about 760 miles an hour. San Francisco to Los Angeles—nearly 400 miles apart—would take 35 minutes, he said.

Most people were skeptical; two groups of engineers got to work. They are now locked in a high-stakes competition that features big-name advisers, 11-foot-diameter steel tubes and magnets powerful enough to crush hands. One plans a 5-mile loop in California that would carry passengers within three years, and another is now building a test track north of Las Vegas.

“We can build the hyperloop today,” said Brogan BamBrogan, co-founder and chief technology officer of Hyperloop Technologies Inc. “It would just be extremely expensive.”

Hyperloop Technologies and Hyperloop Transportation Technologies are locked in a high-stakes race to create the first hyperloop, a low-pressure tube in which levitating capsules carry passengers at nearly the speed of sound.
Hyperloop Technologies and rival Hyperloop Transportation Technologies Inc. say they have held early-stage talks with governments in more than 10 countries, including China, India and the U.K., toward building a hyperloop by 2020, suggesting others also see prospects in the once-fanciful idea.

Mr. Musk initially envisioned the hyperloop capsules to levitate on pressurized air, similar to air hockey, generated by compressors on each capsule. Hyperloop Technologies is still considering that method, but both companies now lean toward using an existing technology to lift the capsules inside the tube: magnetic levitation, or maglev.

Maglev technology generally lifts train cars using powerful electromagnets—electrically charged coils that create strong magnetic fields—requiring lots of energy and sometimes pricey cooling systems. The hyperloop firms say they can cut the cost by using permanent magnets that use much less energy. But that technology is largely unproven, too.

General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc., maker of the U.S. military’s Predator drones, built a 450-foot maglev track in San Diego using permanent magnets 10,000 times as strong as refrigerator magnets. But General Atomics paused the project several years ago after no customers materialized.

Maglev’s history could be a precursor to the hyperloop: a transportation technology that proved technically possible but financially challenging. Maglev was first successfully demonstrated in 1971, but the cost and complexity of a full-scale system delayed the first commercial high-speed line until 2004 in Shanghai.

That 19-mile line in Shanghai cost $63 million a mile, while a proposed 178-mile maglev track in Japan is expected to cost roughly $250 million a mile.

Transportation experts and Hyperloop Technologies have said Mr. Musk’s cost estimate is low. Hyperloop Transportation estimates it can build a track for between $5 million and $20 million a mile.

Hyperloop backers also hope to save money by powering their systems with energy captured from decelerating capsules and by building solar panels atop the tube. They also suggest placing the tube on elevated pylons, reducing land costs compared with high-speed rail.

Proposals for hyperloop-like trains also have been felled by financial and political realities. One company abandoned plans in 2009 for an underground vacuum train in Switzerland because of a lack of funding and political will, said Marcel Jufer, a Swiss Federal Institute of Technology professor who helped lead the project.

That Swiss team aimed for a tunnel with air pressure one-tenth of sea level, compared with one-thousandth for the hyperloop. Maintaining such little pressure in a large area is exceptionally difficult, Mr. Jufer said. “I won’t say it’s impossible, but it will cost a lot,” he said.

OC Oerlikon AG, a Swiss vacuum-pump maker, disagrees. The company said it is selling between 40 and 60 pumps to Hyperloop Transportation for roughly 2% of the projected $173 million budget for its proposed 5-mile track in central California, said Oerlikon executive Carl Brockmeyer.

Despite their similar names and goals—and with Los Angeles headquarters just 10 miles apart—the rivals are vastly different. Hyperloop Technologies is a classic tech startup, with $37 million in venture funds, an industrial-chic office and 72 employees. Its founders are Mr. BamBrogan and venture capitalist Shervin Pishevar, while its board includes former Obama campaign chief Jim Messina and former Yammer Chief Executive David Sacks.

Hyperloop Transportation is a world-wide “movement” of 450 engineers, scientists, antiterrorism experts and others who banded together on a crowdsourcing website, says Chief Executive Dirk Ahlborn, a serial entrepreneur from Berlin. The employees largely fund the company and work part-time for equity; most keep day jobs at places like Boeing Co. and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Mr. Ahlborn said his team has met with decision makers in 14 countries, including China, India and Indonesia. Hyperloop Technologies CEO Rob Lloyd, a former co-president at Cisco Systems Inc., said his team has met with government officials in the U.K., Canada, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates.

Joel Michael, a conference organizer in the Middle East for Fleming Events, said he arranged meetings in October between Hyperloop Transportation executives and top transportation officials from Kuwait, Bahrain and the U.A.E. And Comet Modisaotsile Molatlhegi, a tech entrepreneur in South Africa, said he helped arrange meetings between Hyperloop Transportation executives and South African officials last year. The Wall Street Journal was unable to independently confirm meetings with other countries.

Both companies believe the first full-scale hyperloops will be built outside the U.S. in part because of the government support required. Mr. Lloyd said the hyperloop would fit government requests for high-speed rail on routes such as Liverpool to Newcastle in the U.K. and Singapore to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Mr. Ahlborn predicted the first systems will likely be built in Asia or the Middle East, where transportation needs are more pressing and there is less bureaucracy.

“A lot of times there’s one person that decides. So if he wants it, it’s going to be built,” he said.


ABC 7 - Elon Musk's Hyperloop Vision Could Be Ready for Passengers by 2018
January 21, 2016
Alyssa Newcomb

The Hyperloop, Elon Musk's vision of launching humans through pods inside a high-speed transportation system, could be ready for passengers by 2018, according to a company building a transportation track in California.

The billionaire businessman first unveiled his futuristic idea in 2013, calling it "a cross between a Concord, a rail gun and an air hockey table." He published the 57-page design plan on both Tesla Motors' and SpaceX's blogs as a PDF available for download and for anyone to bring the idea to life.

One company working to make Musk's vision a reality, Hyperloop Transportation Technologies, said it has filed for construction permits in Quay Valley, California, for a 5-mile track.

"We are announcing the filing of the first building permit to Kings County to the building of the first full-scale hyperloop, not a test track," Bibop Gresta, the chief operating officer of Hyperloop Transportation Technologies, said today at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, during a CNBC/TradeShift event.

Once implemented on a larger scale, Musk's plan envisions a Hyperloop that could carry travelers from Los Angeles to San Francisco in half an hour, easily beating out a costly high-speed rail project.

The Hyperloop is a large pneumatic tube, similar to the system used by some hospitals to transport documents, samples and medications in a more efficient manner. New York City also relied on a network of pneumatic tubes to transport mail during the first half of the 20th century.

For human travel, Musk calls for a large fan to be mounted to the front of a pod, which would re-direct high pressure to the rear of the capsule, facilitating even higher speeds.

Bloomberg Business - CP Rail's Harrison to Shift Strategy in Norfolk Southern Bid
January 21, 2016
Frederick Tomesco and Thomas Black

Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd., concerned that mounting political pressure may scuttle its proposed stock-and-cash bid for Norfolk Southern Corp., plans to change strategy to sway lawmakers and reverse the momentum.

“When you’re playing the game and somebody changes the rules on you, you have to review your strategies,” Canadian Pacific Chief Executive Officer Hunter Harrison said Thursday on a conference call. “If this is a political contest and we’re going to forget about the process that was designed, and we’re going to let the legislative branch take over, the rules are all changed.”

Federal and state lawmakers, shippers and railroad operators have taken up Norfolk Southern’s cause by writing letters to the U.S. Surface Transportation Board in opposition to any proposed deal -- even though a formal evaluation process hasn’t even begun. In response, Canadian Pacific has hired public-relations company Edelman for help and asked the U.S. Justice Department to look into a “collective campaign” against the bid.

“There’s a lot of moving parts going on here,” Harrison said. “There are some things that have happened, and almost happen daily, that we certainly did not anticipate.”
Few Details

He declined to provide more details on his strategy. “I would say that when you try to anticipate what we might do, you are probably going to get ahead of us a little bit,” he said.
Norfolk Southern fell 1.6 percent to $70.07 in New York, its lowest close since February 2013. Canadian Pacific, which reported earnings that missed estimates, decreased 0.9 percent to C$149.84 in Toronto.

Harrison has teamed up with activist investor Bill Ackman, whose Pershing Square Capital 
Management owns the largest stake in Canadian Pacific, to push Norfolk Southern shareholders to support the takeover. A deal would create a coast-to-coast railroad that eliminates railcar exchanges between the railroads and would enable Harrison to apply his efficiency expertise to Norfolk Southern, which lags behind other large carriers in key service measures.

The men have brought up the possibility of a proxy battle to win board support for the combination.

General View

The letters of opposition posted on the Surface Transportation Board’s website mirror the general view of the industry, said Lance Fritz, CEO of Union Pacific Corp., the largest publicly traded railroad in North America. Most shippers oppose industry consolidation, he said.

“My review of those documents is that there’s just overwhelming negative sentiment.” Fritz said. “It reflects what we’ve heard.”

Union Pacific has come out publicly against the merger on the grounds that it would hurt service and rail investment. The railroad has discussed its opposition with government officials and others in the industry, which is within its rights, Fritz said.

As a result of the opposition, Canadian Pacific’s initial timeline to complete a deal for Norfolk Southern by October 2017 is now in jeopardy, Harrison said.

“There’s no doubt there’s a delay that’s going to kick in here,” Harrison said. He didn’t provide specifics.

Norfolk Southern’s board has already rejected proposals from Canadian Pacific -- including one that valued the target at about $27 billion in mid-December.

Should Canadian Pacific end its pursuit of Norfolk Southern, options may include an ”aggressive” stock buyback plan, Harrison also said.

”That’s worked well for us” in the past, he said. ”Life goes on.”

The Hill - Feds tout collection of $15 million in railway fines
January 21, 2016
Keith Laing

The U.S. government collected $15 million in fines from railway companies in 2015 as the Federal Railroad Administration achieved a record 75 percent collection rate for penalties, Obama administration officials said Wednesday. 

The FRA said the collection rate last year is a 6 percent increase over 2014 and also the highest percentage of penalties paid in its history. 

The agency attributed the increase to "stepped-up" enforcement of federal regulations after the Obama administration and rail companies came under fire for a series of passenger and freight accidents in recent years. 

 “Safety must be the number one priority for every railroad, and the Department of Transportation will continue to take aggressive action against railroads who fail to follow safety rules,” Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said in a statement. 
“A strong safety enforcement program is critical to prevent accidents, save lives and move our country forward,” he continued. 

The FRA has been under fire from lawmakers after multiple passenger and freight-train accidents involving Amtrak and New York Metro-North trains and oil tankers, raising questions about rail safety.  

Lawmakers who have been critical of the rail industry's safety record gave the FRA credit for the increase in the collection rate of fines that were imposed in 2015, but they said the payment percentage should be closer to 100 percent. 

“Under the fresh leadership of Administrator Sarah Feinberg, FRA has taken a step in the right direction as it cracks down on safety violations – progress from past years of anemic enforcement," Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) said in a statement. 

"But a 75-percent recovery rate is still woefully low, allowing violators to skate by, unconcerned with the ramifications of failure to pay fines in full," he continued. "To ensure the safety of our rails, FRA must be pursuing more robust fines, while never resting until it recovers all of the penalties it levies. I will keep pushing FRA to make this new level of accountability a reality.” 

Railroads have maintained that they were focused on safety in 2015, despite their high-profile push for a delay in a mandate to automate trains with technology that safety groups have said would reduce the risk of accidents on the nation's railways. 

“America’s freight rail industry has a 24/7 focus on safety, it is an ongoing priority to make the nation’s rail system even safer," the Association of American Railroads said in a statement provided to The Hill.

"Federal statistics show rail safety has been dramatically improving over the last several decades with freight railroads continuously taking action to enhance safe train operations, including ongoing operational reviews, increased track inspections and the use of trackside technology,” the group that lobbies for railroads in Washington continued.  

FRA Administrator Sarah Feinberg said Wednesday that her agency will continue cracking down on railroads that violate federal safety laws and regulations. 

"Setting a record for collections is an important milestone, but it is just one element of FRA’s broader effort to achieve a safer rail system,” she said. “As we continue to aggressively enforce safety regulations, FRA will also continue to implement new, innovative solutions to increase safety.”

Occupational Health & Safety - Increased Enforcement Leads to FRA's Highest-Ever Penalty Collection Rate
January 21, 2016

The Federal Railroad Administration announced that an increase in railroad safety regulations led to the highest-ever penalty collection rate in the agency's history. FRA will collect 75 percent of all civil penalties for FY2015, a 6 percent increase over FY2014. The total amount of civil penalties in FY2015 totaled $15 million.

"Safety must be the number one priority for every railroad, and the Department of Transportation will continue to take aggressive action against railroads who fail to follow safety rules," said U.S Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx. "A strong safety enforcement program is critical to prevent accidents, save lives, and move our country forward."

In addition, 29 percent of civil penalties last year were for motive power and equipment violations, followed by 26 percent for track violations.

"Setting a record for collections is an important milestone, but it is just one element of FRA's broader effort to achieve a safer rail system," said FRA Administrator Sarah E. Feinberg. "As we continue to aggressively enforce safety regulations, FRA will also continue to implement new, innovative solutions to increase safety."

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Chicago Sun Times - Freight train derailment causing delays on Metra Rock Island Line
January 21, 2016
Ashlee Rezin

A freight train derailed Thursday morning in south suburban Blue Island, causing delays for outbound trains on Metra’s Rock Island Line.

The train, partly owned by Iowa Interstate Railroad, derailed about 10 a.m. near 123rd Street, according to Metra spokeswoman Meg Reile.


The freight car that is blocking the Rock Island Line tracks was empty at the time of the derailment, Reile said.

A crane started removing the derailed cars at 1:50 p.m., but Reile said the crane has to move three other cars before it can get to the car that is blocking the Metra tracks.

“We’re hoping we’ll be able to open everything up by mid-rush hour,” she said.

All outbound trains will operate on the Beverly Branch Line until further notice, according to Metra. Customers should expect delays of up to 30 minutes on their outbound commute.

Beginning at 4:10 p.m., shuttle trains departing from La Salle Street on an hourly basis will be available for customers who use the 95th Street/Longwood and 103rd Street/Washington Heights Stations, Metra said. Train No. 407, departing the La Salle Street Station at 3:45 p.m., will not stop at 95th Street/Longwood or 103rd Street/Washington Heights.

For inbound Beverly Branch customers, train No. 518, departing Joliet at 2:21 p.m. and arriving at La Salle Street at 3:48 p.m., will be the last inbound train serving the Beverly Branch line until further notice. Train No. 620, the 4:18 p.m. departure from Blue Island/Vermont Street, will not operate today.

Chicago Sun Times - Woman killed when Metra train strikes SUV in Arlington Heights
January 21, 2016
Ashlee Rezin

A Rolling Meadows woman was killed when she drove around crossing gates Thursday afternoon and her SUV was struck by a Metra train on the Union Pacific/Northwest Line in northwest suburban Arlington Heights.

Inbound train No. 646, scheduled to arrive in Chicago at 3:23 p.m., struck the 2009 Honda Element about 2:30 p.m. at Euclid Avenue near the Arlington Heights Station, authorities said.

Zaiemunnisa Khan, 61, was driving southeast on Northwest Highway, made a right turn westbound onto Euclid and drove around the railroad gates that were down with warning lights activated, according to Arlington Heights police.

The train then struck the SUV, causing it to catch fire, police said. The train pushed the fiery vehicle about 1000 feet east of Euclid, finally coming to rest near Northwest Highway and Ridge Avenue.

Khan, of the 100 block of College Crossing in Rolling Meadows, was pronounced dead at the scene at 3:14 p.m., according to the Cook County medical examiner’s office.

She was the only occupant of the SUV and no one on the train was injured, said Arlington Heights Police Deputy Chief Miguel Hernandez.

Police said the crossing gates at Northwest Highway and Euclid were in “good working order” at the time of the crash.

All inbound and outbound trains were temporarily halted in the area, Metra spokeswoman Meg Reile said. As of 5 p.m., all tracks had been reopened, but both inbound and outbound trains were running up to 60 minutes behind schedule.

Passengers on train No. 646 were accommodated by train No. 648, which was scheduled to arrive in Chicago at 4:23 p.m., but was operating up to 70 minutes late.

ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
Home
Palm Beach Post - Indian River County to challenge All Aboard water district permits
January 21, 2016
Jennifer Sorentrue

Indian River County commissioners plan to hire a private attorney to look for ways to challenge All Aboard Florida’s application for a water management permit for its Brightline passenger rail service planned between South Florida and Orlando.

The commission voted Tuesday to allow County Attorney Dylan Reingold to search for an outside law firm to review All Aboard Florida’s permit request filed with the St. Johns River Water Management District, the governmental agency responsible for managing ground­water and surface water resources in all or part of 18 counties in northeast and east?central Florida.

Before the new firm is officially hired, Indian River commissioners must approve the expense, county documents show.

Since 2014, Indian River County has set aside more than $2.5 million to fight All Aboard’s Brightline service. As of Dec. 31, the county had spent more than $1.3 million on outside lawyers, consultants and other expenses.

“We just want to be able to analyze what the (permit) applications are, and evaluate our options and potential challenges,” Reingold said Thursday.

An All Aboard spokesperson declined to comment.

As construction advances on All Aboard Florida’s Miami-to-West Palm Beach leg, the Coral Gables-based company is also applying for regulatory permits it needs to build the second span connecting West Palm Beach to Orlando.

In November, All Aboard filed an application for an environmental resources permit with the St. Johns Water Management District. All Aboard is seeking the district’s blessing to complete track work along a 67-mile stretch through Indian River and Brevard counties.

All Aboard has also filed a request with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to complete work along the same section of rail line.

In what Reingold called a “significant decision,” the army corps this month said it was temporarily shelving All Aboard’s permit application.

In a 2-page-letter dated Jan. 7, the army corps said it would “re-activate” the application after the Federal Railroad Administration releases a “record of decision” as part of its lengthy environmental review of the passenger rail project.

Federal rail officials concluded in August that All Aboard’s Brightline service will have no adverse impacts on communities from Miami to Orlando if increased safety efforts and noise reduction plans are completed. Despite the finding, the agency is still “developing” a formal “record of decision” that will be published as part of the study, the letter said

In the letter, the army corps also said it would not consider the impacts of the 67-mile span alone, because it is part of a much larger project.

All Aboard’s Brightline plans to run 32 trains a day along the Florida East Coast Railway tracks with stops in Miami, Fort Lauderdale, West Palm Beach and Orlando. The company plans to launch service between Miami and West Palm Beach in 2017. The West Palm Beach-to-Orlando span is expected to begin by the end of 2017.

HHFT
Home
Auburn Reporter (NY) - Trains carrying highly flammable shale oil through Auburn raise new public safety concerns
January 21, 2016
Robert Whale

Mile-long behemoths pulling tank cars freighted with millions of gallons of volatile shale oil from the fields of North Dakota, Colorado and Wyoming.

Every day, trains hauling the black, cigar-shaped cars clatter along the tracks through Auburn and other cities of King County on their way to refineries up north, bearing cargo as flammable as gasoline

While the odds of a derailment or explosion in Auburn, emergency personnel familiar with the issue say, are about equal to those of a person winning the Powerball, as singer Elvis Costello famously noted, "accidents will happen."

In July of 2014 a runaway train carrying 30 cars of Bakken crude oil crashed and burned down the town of Lac Mégantic in Quebec, Canada, killing 47 people.

In 2009, a train carrying ethanol derailed and blew up, killing one person in Cherry Valley, Ill. The National Transportation Safety Board declared that the design of the tank cars made them "subject to damage and catastrophic loss of hazardous materials."

On Dec. 30, 2013 a train carrying crude oil derailed in Casselton, N.D., causing violent explosions and a hazardous plume of smoke.

Hazard by rail isn't something new to the fire service — it has been a concern since train number one lumbered down the tracks. The new reality, however, say emergency personnel in Auburn, represents a sizable amplification of hazmat by rail.

"What we're talking about with the crude oil is massive quantities of a flammable product, moving through what are essentially urbanized areas, like downtown Seattle or through our corridor here," said Valley Regional Fire Authority Chief Mike Gerber.

"The difference of that versus the occasional train that goes through hauling an industrial chemical, or chlorine or whatever is that these things are giant. They're a mile long, full of millions of gallons of this volatile crude oil coming out of the shale. And if a train does catch on fire, they know now that it's highly flammable, in fact, far more flammable than what crude oil used to be," Gerber said.

Information such as how many trains pass through a city like Auburn every day and when they will come through the railroads consider proprietary, information that should not be disclosed for reasons of public safety, said Auburn Traffic Safety Engineer Joe Welsh.

According to the Association of American Railroads, some 400,000 carloads of crude oil traveled by rail in 2013 to the nation's refineries, up from 9,500 in 2008,

In the spring of 2014, the State of Washington issued its Marine and Rail Oil Transportation Study.

Gov. Jay Inslee read the report, got on television, and declared, "we need oil train safety." The feds stepped in and said, "we need to start talking about rail safety and regulations." There was talk of 25 to 30 more oil trains a day headed to refineries up north for off-loading, refining and shipping oil to overseas markets.

Time out, said influential voices, including that of Auburn City Councilman Bill Peloza, we need to look at this. His attention was riveted to the issue by newspaper editorials in 2014 and by his own extensive research.

What Peloza has done since is raise concerns about possible effects on public safety, water resources, the environment, the economy and traffic. At his urging, on April 1, 2014, following what other cities were doing, the City Council passed a resolution requesting that agencies conducting environmental reviews study the issues outlined above and asking that Auburn "be included in any environmental impact statements related to any project that may cause an increase in oil rail traffic through Auburn." It also asked that the federal government immediately implement safety regulations affecting older tank cars, train speeds and other identified hazards associated with flammable crude oil.

"We're not going to stop the trains from running, but we can regulate things like speed," said Peloza, who brought the subject to the attention of U.S. Sens. Patty Murray and Maria Cantwell.

In 2014, the King County Council directed its office of emergency management to run a tabletop scenario to see what a worst-case, worst-place scenario would look like.

The scenario was that a mile-long train, headed north on the tracks, had derailed at the boundary between the cities of Tukwila and Seattle along Interstate 5, just to the side of West Marginal Way where the Duwamish River runs through.

"It became apparent quickly that nobody by themselves has the capability to respond to one of these large oil train disasters," Gerber said. "You know, dozens of cars involved. And nobody ever will. It's going to be a regional effort. It's going to be an effort between public and private partnerships.

"And that's what we work off of today," Gerber said of the City of Auburn's emergency management plan.

All the agencies involved in the exercise agreed that writing a plan specifically for a shale oil disaster may or may not have been of value.

"We said it's hazmat by rail, it's just a big quantity of it," Gerber said. "If it tips and spills, it's a hazardous material spill, and we're going to have to bring in the Department of Ecology and probably federal resources. Also, the vendor, which is BNSF or Union Pacific, whoever's running the rail, is going to be obligated to bring their resources into that. And we can partner with that."

As Gerber emphasized, the VRFA is a small town fire department, not a big city agency like Seattle or Tacoma.

"So for us, we call upon all of our help around through our automatic mutual aid agreements, but that's going to be exhausted the minute something big happens. And then we're going to go to the county level, and they're going to start allocating resources from all the different fire zones. We're going to end up with hazmat teams and fire suppression equipment, and everything we can do in the initial stages to prevent whatever further damage is going to occur," Gerber said.

"We run an evacuation scenario in almost every exercise we do through Auburn's Emergency Management Office or Pacific's or anybody else's. And the reason we do that is familiarity with evacuation plans is something that nobody ever practices. We want law enforcement and us to be on the same page when it comes to it.

"All-hazards disaster planning is the key. Using those fundamental elements of the comprehensive emergency plan that are already written and applying them to whatever incident that may be, including oil train emergencies, those are the tools we have in our toolbox to get the job done," Gerber said.

METRO NORTH
Home
Lohud (NY) - Crumbling ties cost Metro-North in overtime
January 21, 2016
Thomas Zambito

In the summer of 2013, Metro-North canceled rush-hour trains on two busy commuter routes so it could rip out hundreds of water-damaged concrete ties between the Melrose and Woodlawn stops in the Bronx.

Track workers logged hundreds of hours doing the backbreaking work of removing the ties and replacing them with wood, contributing to an uptick in overtime payouts for track workers in the Bronx in 2013 and 2014.

Among them were Eduardo Vargas, a machinist, and track supervisor Robert M. O’Connell, two of the railroad’s biggest overtime earners during those years, Metro-North records show.

Not the first time

It wasn’t the first time concrete ties, which steady the rail so 400-ton locomotives don’t rumble, had failed.

In 2005, Metro-North announced it would have to replace some 52,000 crumbling concrete ties purchased in 1997 and 1998 that were installed on the Hudson Line between Ossining and Tarrytown.

“Concrete ties are expected to last 50 years, but these didn’t even last 10, and now the job needs to be done a second time,” a state comptroller’s report concluded in 2005. The ties cost $14 million.

On July 18, 2013, a northbound CSX train carrying municipal garbage derailed in the Bronx, along Metro-North’s Hudson Line. Among the factors cited for the derailment was the deterioration of concrete ties in the area, the National Transportation Safety Board concluded. No one was injured in an accident that caused $827,700 in property damage.

An official with Metro-North’s top union says the railroad should have learned its lesson, especially since the Bronx is notorious for poor drainage that creates so-called “mudspots” on concrete ties and causes them to crumble.

“For the conditions that we have in the Northeast, on Metro-North in particular, wood ties are the best for what we do,” said Chris Silvera, the secretary-treasurer of the Teamsters union, Local 808, which represents track workers. “If you’re in Texas or Arizona, concrete is good… Water and tracks are not a good mix."

MTA sues

In 2006, the MTA sued Rocla Concrete Tie of Colorado, the manufacturer of the first batch of ties, to try to recover the millions spent in 1997 and 1998, reports say. The batch of ties that needed to be replaced in the Bronx came from a Pittsburgh manufacturer.

Despite their history, Metro-North President Joseph Giulietti defends the decision to spend more money on concrete — a decision that dates back to earlier administrations. Giulietti was named president in February 2014.

“Every now and then I hear these things, ‘Why the hell did you go to the concrete ties,’” he said. “Because it was the right thing to do.”

He said Metro-North was an industry leader in using concrete ties, which are considered more cost effective since they last longer than wood.

Fixing drainage

A blue-ribbon panel appointed by Metro-North's agency, the MTA, agreed.

“Prior to the heightened focus on their track maintenance program, (Metro-North Railroad) track management’s plan to address this circumstance was to replace the concrete ties with the wood ties, which deteriorate at a slower rate,” the panel wrote in August 2014. “However, this approach is only treating the symptom of a deeper problem.”

Metro-North spent $11 million on a project to correct its drainage issues.

Glen Hayden, a Metro-North vice president who oversees track workers, said the railroad’s mistake was in not keeping up with its maintenance of the concrete ties.

“The correct capital decision was made but then the future maintenance was never performed,” Hayden said. “It’s like buying a new car and then never changing the oil. You have to change the oil and, if you don’t, you’re going to have a problem.”

STATE BY STATE
Home
Arizona Journal - ‘Rail Safety’ Bill Receives Council’s Divided Support
January 21, 2016
Nolan Madden

In an effort to promote industry safety, railroad unions across the country are lobbying in support of House Congressional Bill 1763, a proposal to eliminate one-person train crews.
In April 2015, The Safe Freight Act (H.R. 1763), introduced by Congressman Don Young (R-Alaska), called for two crew members–one certified locomotive engineer and one certified conductor–on all freight trains.

The newly-introduced legislation mirrors its predecessor, H.R. 3040, but has been revised with a new legislation number, as Ellis Laird, who is a legislative representative for SMART, the International Association of Sheet Metal, Air, Rail and Transportation Workers, and representative for United Transportation Union Local 113 in Winslow, recently explained to the Holbrook City Council.
“We feel this is a very important issue to our communities, for their safety,” said Laird, citing a freight derailment that occurred in a rail town in Quebec, Canada.

The disaster happened in the town of Lac-Mégantic, on July 6, 2013, when an unattended 74-car freight train carrying Bakken crude oil rolled down a hillside and derailed downtown, resulting in fire and the explosion of multiple tank cars.
According to reports, 42 people were confirmed dead, with five more missing and presumed dead. More than 30 buildings in the town’s center were destroyed, and all but three of the 39 remaining downtown buildings were set to be demolished due to petroleum contamination.

Laird said environmental clean-up costs for the accident totaled $7.5 million, with a court-assessed settlement paid by the United States-based Montreal, Maine and Atlantic Railway (MMA), which owns the railway line passing through Lac-Mégantic, totaling $445 million.
Laird also noted the derailment of an Amtrak passenger train in Philadelphia, Pa., in May 2015, which federal authorities said was clocked traveling at 106 mph–more than twice the speed limit–before jumping off its tracks, killing seven people and injuring more than 200.

That same month, a crude oil train derailed and caught fire in a rural area of central North Dakota, prompting the evacuation of a nearby town. No injuries were reported.
Laird continued, “There was one man operating these trains, and we do not want to see a disaster like this happen in our community.

“We get called to work at all types of hours. We work long hours on long trips. We aren’t permitted to listen to music, or to read. When you’re on that train, you’re dedicated to your assignment, and it’s easy to become very tired.

“We feel that, for the safety of our communities and our workers, we need to have two men on board,” he said.

UTU Local 113 received the Holbrook council’s support of the rail legislation in 2014, and the council again offered its support of the bill by letter last week.
Councilwoman Francie Payne, and Councilmen Tim Dixon and C.J. Wischmann voted in support of the letter, while Vice Mayor Wade Carlisle recused himself from the discussion and vote because he is an employee of Burlington Northern Santa Fe. Mayor Bobby Tyler was absent from the meeting due to family obligations.

However, Councilman Richard Peterson expressed to the union representatives and fellow council members his opposition to the bill.

“Jobs are important, who could be against jobs? But I did read about the accident in Quebec, and it’s really a stretch to say that the accident was due to being operated by a one-man crew,” said the councilman.

“Most of it was due to poor policy and maintenance than to a one-man crew; the engineer was actually asleep in a motel while the accident happened.
“A conductor would have been a second man on the crew, so you would have had more expertise there. But having more than one person on a crew has never been a federal law. It’s just been a matter of union negotiation for years.

“I realize that there are two separate unions, one for conductors and one for engineers. But they negotiated not to have two-member crews. So after this accident in Canada–in a foreign country, before there was even a complete investigation, two months later–House Resolution 3040 was dropped. The investigation was not completed, so it would be hard to say that it was because of a one-man crew.”

Peterson referenced the National Transportation Safety Board’s push for GPS-aided Positive Train Control, designed to make freight rail transportation safer by automatically stopping a train before certain types of accidents occur.

He continued, “Going to the legislature isn’t going to accomplish the collective bargaining of a federal mandate. One of the problems is that the smaller railroads will have a harder time absorbing the costs of Positive Train Control and also having to maintain a second crewman who isn’t necessarily needed. By the way, the smaller railroads are more likely to be non-union,” he said.

“Safety is an amorphous thing… You could take any step and call it safety, such as slowing the trains down. There is a statistic that there are about 1,000 railroad deaths per year. Most of these are because of people being on the tracks in the path of a train, or there is debris on the track, or the cross ties become rotted and cause a derailment. All of these things have nothing to do with a one-man crew.

“But I’m sure most of us who own a business would feel put upon if the federal government made it law that you had to have a certain number of employees.

He concluded, “It seems to me that, the way to have more jobs–and we all want more jobs–is not to have it regulated by the heavy hand of the government, which has caused the industry to be not competitive.”

Penn Live - Aging Harrisburg train station in line for major improvements, development
January 21, 2016
Christian Alexanderson

Harrisburg's hub for train and bus travel will get a $15 million facelift over the next two years and receive another $50 to $60 million in the future for additional improvements and developments.

Gov. Tom Wolf announced Thursday that the state and federal governments were going to make significant long- and short-term investments to improve the battered Harrisburg Transportation Center.

The first phase of the project — which will cost $15 million — will include making improvements to the aging facility, said Transportation Secretary Leslie Richards. The improvements are planned to be completed in two years.

The initial $15 million will be used to install energy-efficient heating and cooling systems, replace multiple roofs, install new windows, renovate underutilized space and do what needs to be done to stabilize the building.

These improvements are necessary, Richards said, so that the state and federal government can invest more money in long-term projects.

The governor said the planed improvements to the transportation center will have a positive impact on the city. Once the initial $15 million improvements are made, another $50 to $60 million in state and federal funding has been pledged for long-range, development projects

The long-range projects would tie surrounding businesses, neighborhoods and communities in with the newly improved transportation center.

"When that happens here, what is already the centerpiece of the city will become an even bigger focus for development -- residential and commercial," Wolf said.

Harrisburg Mayor Eric Papenfuse said he believes the long-range projects and continued investment will make the transportation center "so much more."

Papenfuse said he believes improvements to the transportation center will serve as a catalyst for larger development throughout the city. The long-range projects will be a part of the city's comprehensive plan.

The long-range projects could include improving the nearby underpass, connecting the train station to surrounding neighborhoods, improving lighting, fostering residential development, implementing a bike-share program, constructing green spaces and making Market Street a two-way road.

"This is possible through the collective efforts of so many people focusing on how we can make this, literally, the center engine for economic development and continued revitalization of the city of Harrisburg," the mayor said.

"I think you're going to see amazing things to come out of here in the next several years."

Pioneer Journal (MN) - Wadena looks to create rail quiet zone through town
January 21, 2016
Anna Erickson

The city of Wadena is hoping to establish a rail quiet zone through town, coinciding with the 2018 Highway 10 reconstruction project.

The city's engineering firm Bolton & Menk has been hired to work on a quiet zone study.

The purpose of the study is to pick up where the 2013 Wadena Comprehensive Plan Quiet Zone Assessment left off in determining the feasibility of establishing a Federal Railroad Administration compliant railroad quiet zone for the city of Wadena.

"We hope to continue the process that was already started," said Phil Martin, engineer with Bolton & Menk. "With the proper track safety and security in place you can keep the trains from blowing their whistles through town."

According to the Federal Railroad Administration, under the Train Horn Rule, locomotive engineers must begin to sound train horns at least 15 seconds and no more than 20 seconds in advance of all public grade crossings.

If a train is traveling faster than 60 mph, engineers will not sound the horn until it is within a quarter mile of the crossing, even if the advance warning is less than 15 seconds.

There is a "good faith" exception for locations where engineers can't precisely estimate their arrival at a crossing and begin to sound the horn no more than 25 seconds before arriving at the crossing.

Train horns must be sounded in a standardized pattern of two long, one short and one long blasts. The pattern must be repeated or prolonged until the lead locomotive or lead cab car occupies the grade crossing. The rule does not stipulate the durations of long and short blasts.

Establishing a quiet zone requires several safety improvements to mitigate risk caused by the absence of a horn.

Bolton & Menk will update and analyze existing conditions of the rail crossings and develop recommendations for improvements to those crossings.

City councilman Bruce Uselman noted that rail crossings that are in a quiet zone more safety features. such as crossing closures medians and additional signage.

City Administrator Brad swenson said the city has been budgeting money for the last several years for the quiet zone project.





3


