 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 12, 2016
TV & RADIO
CA Begin Contract Negotiations on High Speed Rail Project	2
Twin Cities to Chicago High Speed Rail Plan	2
Truck vs. Railroad Bridge	2
Victim Identified in Fatal Train Accident	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Wall Street Journal - Railroad CSX Sees Clearer Tracks Ahead	2
PTC
Progressive Railroading - The year ahead: ASLRRA's Darr offers outlook for short-line railroads	3
Easton Courier (CT) - Blumenthal: Install train safety system on all rails	6
Railway Age - AAR sets incremental PTC goals	7
RAIL INCIDENTS
WDBJ (VA) - Train investigators see sharp increase in pedestrian deaths on Virginia tracks	8
HIGH SPEED RAIL
The Fresno Bee (CA) - High-speed rail board considers contract for third San Joaquin Valley segment	9
MPR News (MN) - Twin Cities-Chicago high-speed rail plans get a funding boost	10
HHFT
Bucks County Courier Times (PA) – Editorial: Crude awakening	11
AMTRAK
Philly.com - Philly sounds off on Amtrak's future	12
STATE BY STATE
The New York Times – Editorial:  A New Old Plan for Penn Station	13
Politico New York - Cuomo aide: Infrastructure plan will cost $100 billion	14
Main Line Today (PA) - Can a New Train Station Transform Paoli?	15


TV & RADIO
Home
CA Begin Contract Negotiations on High Speed Rail Project
KGET (NBC) - Bakersfield, CA

Twin Cities to Chicago High Speed Rail Plan
KARE-MIN (NBC) - Minneapolis, MN

Truck vs. Railroad Bridge
WSMV-NAS (NBC) - Nashville, TN

Victim Identified in Fatal Train Accident
WSAV-SAV (NBC) - Savannah, GA

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Wall Street Journal - Railroad CSX Sees Clearer Tracks Ahead
January 11, 2016
Steven Russolillo

For railroad operators, 2015 was a year to forget. Fortunately, rough stretches of track usually have been followed by far more pleasant ones.

CSX Corp., the first railroad to report quarterly results on Tuesday, presents a decent buying opportunity with Wall Street so downbeat about slumping commodities markets, difficult manufacturing conditions and falling rail volumes.

CSX has been particularly hurt of late by the slumping U.S. coal market and the strong dollar. Coal is a key freight category for rail companies, comprising about 15% of their revenue. For CSX, it is about 20%.

Cheap natural gas prompted U.S. coal production to fall last year to its lowest level in nearly 30 years. Prices hit their lowest annual average since 1999, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Volumes shipped by rail dropped 12% last year, according to the Association of American railroads.

Following a cut to its full-year earnings outlook last month, analysts now estimate CSX will report fourth-quarter earnings of 46 cents a share, down three cents from a year earlier.

CSX shares have lost more than one-third of their value since May, echoing the S&P 500 Railroads Sub-Industry Index’s 32% decline for 2015. That is the industry’s worst showing since at least 1997 and bucks an excellent long-term performance.

Since 2000, the rail index has outperformed the S&P 500 in all but four years, beating the market by over 450 percentage points. And in the three years prior to 2015 in which railroad stocks underperformed the S&P 500, they bounced back the following year with gains of more than 20% each time.

Analysts commend CSX’s productivity improvements in recent quarters which are helping offset weaker-than-expected volumes. Other growth drivers such as burgeoning “intermodal” transport—moving goods from ship to truck to rail—also are promising.

That leaves CSX shares attractively priced. Trading at its lowest level since the summer of 2013, the stock fetches just 12 times projected earnings over the next 12 months—a 16% discount to its average multiple over the past three years.

It is always hard to see what lies just around the bend, but this train should gather steam once the view clears.

PTC
Home
Progressive Railroading - The year ahead: ASLRRA's Darr offers outlook for short-line railroads
January 10, 2016
Julie Sneider

Linda Bauer Darr sums up the past 12 months as like a trip on "Mr. Toad's Wild Ride.” Not only did railroads take a hit in carload traffic activity for the year, but the rail industry found itself in one of the most difficult political environments in recent history.

"There was a lot of scrutiny on railroad operations, and that scrutiny impacted everything we were trying to accomplish," says Darr, president of the American Short Line and Regional Railroad Association (ASLRRA). "Whether it was the extension of the PTC deadline, or dealing with training rules pending at the U.S. Department of Transportation, or whether it was the 45G tax credit and even funding for the Short Line Safety Institute — all these things were in play at a time when people were in a pretty bad mood, generally, about railroading."

The people she's referring to are lawmakers, regulators and the news media, who zeroed in on rail safety issues in the aftermath of some large-scale derailments, including a number of crude-oil train explosions and the Amtrak crash in May 2015 that left eight people dead.

The intense scrutiny of railroads in the aftermath of those high-profile incidents put the industry in "more of a defense mode than we had been in the past," she says.

So, all in all, 2015 — which was Darr's first year on the job at ASLRRA — was a challenging year. But like Mr. Toad's trip at Disneyland, the rail industry's wild ride eventually landed on a smoother path. In December, Congress passed a multi-year surface transportation bill that extended the positive train control (PTC) deadline for five years, and an omnibus appropriations bill that includes a two-year extension to the 45G short-line tax credit. 

"Ultimately, I was really excited about the way that we wrapped up the year," says Darr. 

Getting down to business
Now that Congress has removed the uncertainty over the tax credit and PTC deadline issues, Darr hopes that 2016 will be a year in which ASLRRA members can spend less time on what’s happening in the political realm, and more time on taking care of business to improve safety, carload activity and infrastructure. 

For example, the 45G tax credit is "very important to our members," Darr explains, adding that many short lines were reluctant to forge ahead with certain infrastructure project plans while the credit's future was in question.

A federal tax credit for track maintenance conducted by short lines and regional railroads, 45G is equal to 50 percent of qualified track expenses and other infrastructure projects. In place since 2005, the credit expired Dec. 31, 2014. The new law allows short lines and regionals to claim the credit for 2015 and extends it to 2016.

"It's always a risk when you are dealing with a tax credit that will be retroactive," Darr says. "It wreaks havoc with budgeting and planning."

With the extension in place, short lines and regionals can ramp up their capex plans and invest in infrastructure that will improve safety and operational efficiency, Darr says. The ASLRRA estimated that the latest bill would support an $800 million investment in short-line track improvements over the next two years.

PTC: an industry transformation
On the PTC front, the five-year extension of what was originally the federally mandated Dec. 31, 2015, deadline for railroads to implement the safety technology came as a sigh of relief to railroads. However, that doesn’t mean that the short lines have five more years to figure out how PTC will affect their businesses; they will have to start adapting to the new technology as soon as their Class I partners are ready to implement PTC on their lines, Darr says.

"I think PTC is going to be transformative for the industry overall," she says. "The Class Is are investing billions of dollars in this technology. Once they have PTC up and running, I think they will aggressively push to make sure that the people they are doing business with are PTC compliant."

The run-up to the 2015 deadline helped sharpen the industry's focus on PTC compliance in ways that it hadn’t been focused before, Darr believes.
 
"As that focus deepens, we also see the concern about where we will get the resources to be in compliance," she adds.

One thing ASLRRA is exploring is creating a pooling arrangement for a product that would help its members with the back-office server function of PTC.

"We don't feel like everyone in the short-line industry should have to invest in that independently, so we're looking at a bulk-buying opportunity," she says. 

Additionally, ASLRRA is exploring the potential for a pooling arrangement for PTC-related insurance requirements of its members.

Also on ASLRRA's agenda for 2016 is assessing the rail-service market and the potential for short lines, regionals and Class Is to work together on new business development opportunities.

"Because of the decline in certain commodity areas, we're going to take a much harder look at how we do carload business, the single-unit business that has really been the lifeblood for our industry," Darr says. "In particular, we've looked at how we can grow the communication between the Class Is and short lines on carload collaboration."

Darr says those conversations will take place on a case-by-case basis between Class Is and their short-line partners, as well as at rail industry association caucuses and committee meetings.

"All boats will rise for the Class Is and short lines if we can figure out ways to promote the rail sector business for everybody," she says. 

Making progress at the Safety Institute
Another item on ASLRRA's 2016 planner will be safety of the non-PTC kind. The association has developed the Short Line Safety Institute with the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), Volpe National Transportation Systems Center and University of Connecticut (UCONN). 

And ASLRRA officials are "very excited" about the newly established institute’s progress over the past year. In December, the institute announced it had hired Ron Hynes as its executive director. Hynes, who started his new job on Jan. 4, more recently served as the FRA's director of the Office of Technical Oversight. He has more than 40 years of railroad experience, including in the short-line sector.

"There's no one who understands safety better than Ron Hynes," Darr says. 

Moreover, the institute will soon start producing some results. Over the past year, the institute has focused on assessing the safety cultures of 12 regionals and short lines that transport crude oil. It is charged with using those assessments to identify ways in which the railroads can improve safety.

In the next few months, the institute expects to come out with aggregate results that will help set an "aggressive agenda" of programming in the form of best practices, training and education, webinars, communications and research, Darr says.

By 2016's end, Darr hopes the industry will find itself in an even better position to promote the positive side of rail.

"We're not the only game out there — we're competing with ships, planes and trucks — so we need to stay on our game," she says. "We have to provide excellent customer service, which the short lines are known for. It's about sticking to our business, working hard, keeping at it, collaborating and keeping an eye on the customer."

Easton Courier (CT) - Blumenthal: Install train safety system on all rails
January 10, 2016

U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal is calling for the installation of technology that can help prevent train crashes on a portion of rail from New York City to New Haven.

Blumenthal said the positive train control technology has recently been activated on Amtrak tracks between Philadelphia and New York. He said that leaves the New York-to-New Haven stretch as the only portion of the Northeast Corridor without the safety enhancement.

Positive train control technology also was activated recently on the Philadelphia-to-Washington section. The stretch from Boston to New Haven was already operational.

Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, said all railroads, including Metro-North Railroad, should install the potentially life-saving technology as quickly as possible.

Positive train control technology uses GPS and other tracking systems to automatically stop trains in danger of derailing because they are speeding, are about to collide with other trains or are about to enter work areas. The technology could help avoid deadly passenger train derailments, like that of an Amtrak train in Philadelphia this year.

Investigators say the technology might have prevented that May 12 crash, which killed eight people and injured about 200.

Blumenthal said Amtrak has demonstrated that meeting the deadline for installing the technology is possible, even on a dense, congested corridor like the track between Washington, D.C., and New York City.

“All railroads should follow Amtrak’s lead and implement PTC now, ahead of the recently extended schedule,” Blumenthal said in a written statement. “And Congress must do its part by providing more funds to assist railroads in installing PTC.”

A sweeping five-year, $305-billion transportation bill approved by Congress this month and signed by President Barack Obama provides $200 million to help commuter railroads install positive train control technology.

In Boston, the fiscal control board that oversees the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority voted in November to install positive train control on all commuter rail lines within five years.

Railway Age - AAR sets incremental PTC goals
January 11, 2016
William C. Vantuono

Working within the three-year extension Congress granted in late 2015, the Association of American Railroads has set year-end 2016 goals for Positive Train Control implementation.

 

“In 2016, PTC is a priority for freight railroads as they focus on getting PTC installed and implemented as quickly as possible, without sacrificing safety,” AAR spokesperson Ed Greenberg told Railway Age. “The emphasis is that it is critical to make sure PTC is done right. Field testing of PTC is essential for safely deploying the technology and will be a critical focus for the rail industry this year. Currently, rail operators are discovering failure rates of up to 40% as they install and test PTC equipment in PTC labs and designated pilot territories, underscoring the importance of proper testing.”

Currently, the AAR expects the following to occur by Dec. 31, 2016:

• 38% of the targeted 60,153 route miles will have PTC technology.

• 63% of 22,066 locomotives will be equipped with PTC technology.

• 51% of the 114,515 employees requiring training will be PTC-qualified.

• 87% of the more than 32,654 wayside signal systems will be PTC-ready.

• 77 % of the 3,968 base station radios will be installed.

“As of Dec. 31, 2015, freight railroads had spent more than $6 billion on PTC with billions more to be spent as railroads continue installation and implementation,” Greenberg noted. “Final PTC implementation cost is expected to be in the $9 billion to $10 billion range. Congress extended the deadline for the installation of PTC by three years to 2018, and up to an additional two years, to 2020, to finalize full implementation and testing of the new technology, provided railroads meet specific progress benchmarks:?PTC hardware is 100% installed on its system by Dec. 31, 2018; PTC technology is implemented on more than 50% of its system; employee training required by FRA regulations is completed; and all spectrum necessary for PTC implementation is obtained.”

The AAR continues to emphasize that railroad safety has seen substatial and steady improvement since long before PTC.

“Federal statistics show rail safety has been dramatically improving over the past several decades,” Greenberg said. “Derailments are down 80 % since 1980 and more than 40 % since 2000. “Statistics show 99.99% of tank cars containing crude oil and hazardous materials arrive at destination without incident. The industry recognizes continuous safety improvements are needed and it is something freight railroads remain focused on. They’re constantly incorporating new technologies to improve rail safety, including wayside fault detectors that monitor track and train integrity and specialized inspection cars that monitor track safety and identify track anomalies. Since [partial deregulation under the Staggers Act] in 1980, $600 billion has been spent on maintaining and further modernizing the 140,000-mile network. Millions are being spent on research and testing at TTCI, the industry’s research facility in Pueblo, Colo.”

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
WDBJ (VA) - Train investigators see sharp increase in pedestrian deaths on Virginia tracks
January 12, 2016
Tim Saunders

When major roads intersect with railroads, drivers see blinking red lights and a long arm that prevents them from crossing when a train is coming.

Pedestrians walking on a rural stretch of track don't have those warnings.

"You might feel the wind right before it hits you.  That's about the only warning you would get," said Nicky Strock, a retired conductor who worked for Norfolk Southern.

Strock talked to WDBJ7 Monday along a Bedford road that was close, but safely off of railroad property.

During his work he often saw pedestrians get much closer to the tracks.

"It was just about every trip that we would make," Strock said.

That decision has led to tragedies across our state.

14 people died while trespassing on Virginia tracks last year, double the number reported in 2014.  Four people have died since December 1.

Strock said when engineers see a person on the tracks, there's usually not enough time to avoid hitting that person.

"A loaded 5,000-ton train on a level track at 50 miles-per-hour takes close to a mile to stop," said Strock.

Pedestrians aren't the only ones getting killed.  Strock says drivers ignore warnings and cross tracks without looking.  Five people died that way last year.

Strock witnessed one of those accidents first-hand in 1996.

"I hit a vehicle that crossed the tracks right in front of us," explained Strock.  "Engineer was blowing the horn and we hit him.  We knocked his pickup truck 175 feet from the crossing."

Through non-profits like Operation Lifesaver he's tried to encourage safety, and discourage the practice of trespassing on any train track.

"You would have a better chance of surviving a car hitting you at 60 miles an hour than a train hitting you at 40," said Strock.

Strock wants people to remember if you cross onto railroad tracks anywhere other than a marked road crossing, you are violating the law and could receive a fine if caught.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
The Fresno Bee (CA) - High-speed rail board considers contract for third San Joaquin Valley segment
January 11, 2016
Tim Sheehan

The third of three construction contracts for designing and building a high-speed rail line through the San Joaquin Valley could be awarded Tuesday by the California High-Speed Rail Authority.

The authority board, meeting in Sacramento, will consider the lowest of four qualifying bids for a 22-mile section of the route from just north of the Tulare-Kern county line to Poplar Avenue at the north edge of Shafter.

The low bid for the work was $347.5 million, submitted by California Rail Builders. The team is led by Ferrovial Agroman US Corp., the American subsidiary of Spanish construction firm Ferrovial SA. The team also includes Eurostudios, a Spanish engineering company, and Othon Inc., a Houston engineering and environmental consulting firm.

Five teams submitted bids in November, but the prices were kept sealed until last week while each of the proposals was evaluated for technical expertise.

Ferrovial Agroman scored the highest in the technical evaluation, said Scott Jarvis, the rail authority’s chief engineer. In a report to the board, Jarvis said the agency’s staff “is pleased to note that the highly qualified team of California Rail Builders had the highest technical proposal score and the lowest total proposal price.”

The Ferrovial Agroman bid was one of two that came in below the low range of engineers’ estimates of $400 million to $500 million for the project.

If the rail board authorizes CEO Jeff Morales to finalize a deal with California Rail Builders, the total contract will include an additional $107 million to pay for extra needs including utility relocation – a sum that would have been added to any of the bids to cover the additional costs for having to move lines and pipes operated by Pacific Gas & Electric Co., AT&T and LEVEL 3 Communications along the rail line.

One of the five bidding teams, Central Valley Connection Builders, was disqualified from the evaluation because it was unable to provide the authority with a surety letter or a proposal bond, Jarvis said. The Central Valley Connection Builders team included two Spanish firms, FCC Construccion SA and Corsan-Corviam Construccion SA.

The first two Valley construction segments for which contracts have been awarded are a 29-mile stretch between Fresno and Madera, and about 65 miles of the route from south of Fresno to the Tulare-Kern county line.

MPR News (MN) - Twin Cities-Chicago high-speed rail plans get a funding boost
January 11, 2016
Elizabeth Baier

A group of private and public funders in Minnesota and Wisconsin have committed $660,000 to further high-speed rail service between the Twin Cities and Chicago.

The funders include the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, the Ramsey County Regional Rail Authority, the La Crosse, Wis., Area Planning Committee, and the Minnesota High Speed Rail Commission.

The commission wants to develop Minnesota's first high-speed rail corridor to connect the Twin Cities with Milwaukee and Chicago. Together the group will pay for an environmental analysis to be completed by next year.

A feasibility study completed in 2015 estimated more than 150,000 passengers a year would use a daily train leaving Chicago in the morning and returning from St. Paul in the afternoon. Preliminary estimates say the project could cost more than of $141 million.

HHFT
Home
Bucks County Courier Times (PA) – Editorial: Crude awakening
January 12, 2016

If you’re sick of those hundred-car freight trains that keep you counting the minutes at rail crossings across the area, it might help to know that those slow-moving trains are the reason you’re getting a bargain at the pump these days.

More often than not, the black tankers that make up those trains are carrying crude oil. And the increased frequency with which they’re traveling through Bucks and the surrounding area reflects America’s new status as the world’s leading oil producer, and purveyor of cheap gasoline. But there’s a trade-off for the financial windfall: the possibility that a derailment could produce a deadly explosion.

It happened twice in 2013. Forty-seven people were killed outside Quebec when an oil train derailed there. Several months later, in North Dakota, a derailment and explosion created a smoky fireball that could be seen 25 miles away. Miraculously, nobody was injured, but 2,400 nearby residents had to be evacuated.

Closer to home, an oil train derailed some 30 miles from Pittsburgh in 2014 and crashed into a factory. Again, nobody was injured, but the mishap caused $2 million in property damage.

By the way, that train was headed for the Morrisville rail yard here in Bucks County. It was one of many.

On average, 22 oil trains carrying at least a million gallons of crude pass through Bucks every week, according to the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency. Not surprising, when you consider these numbers: In 2008, 9,500 oil tankers traveled America’s railways. Just six years later, in 2014, that number was 493,196 tank cars. So says the Association of American Railroads.

Reporter Kyle Bagenstose gathered that information and much, much more for his exhaustive report, “Crude awakening,” published in Sunday’s newspaper and online. What was revealing about the story, in addition to Bucks and Montgomery counties’ status as gateways for oil shipped into and out of Philadelphia, is the mystery that shrouds the oil trains: Nobody knows when they’re coming, including first responders, because the law does not require advance notice.

Emergency management folks here don’t make a big deal of that. They say they’re prepared from both an equipment and training standpoint should a catastrophe occur.

That’s good to hear. But we have to think that knowing when and where oil trains are coming would help emergency workers who need to know what’s fueling a fire before they try to put it out.

U.S. Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pa., agrees that more information should be available “to protect vulnerable communities,” and he has called on federal authorities to demand it. Likewise, Gov. Wolf appointed a task force that came up with a list of 27 safety recommendations.
So far, no action at the federal or state levels. John Cease isn’t surprised by that. The former railroad safety director and investigator told us that rules and regulations tend to follow deadly accidents. “The rules of the railroad are written in blood,” he said.

His wry observation should serve as a dire warning.

AMTRAK
Home
Philly.com - Philly sounds off on Amtrak's future
January 12, 2016
Jason Laughlin

In November I wrote about the Northeast Corridor Futures program, which is offering three visions for the future of rail on the heavily traveled route. You can see the plans at www.necfuture.com.

The plans span the modest to the ambitious, with the most radical changes proposing new Amtrak stops at Philadelphia International Airport and a new station in Center City at the present Market Station East, as well as a tunnel that runs through the heart of the city. For the past month the Federal Railroad Administration has been shopping a draft environmental impact statement around the east coast’s major cities in a bid for public comments. Monday evening the NEC road show visited Philadelphia.

The very informed comments from the people attending highlighted how much influence rail can have on the future of the city.

The proposed tunnel, and Amtrak stops at the airport and in Center City, got the most comments.

“This Philadelphia tunnel is something we don’t need,” said Scott Maits, who described himself as a transit activist.

He noted that Center City development was growing toward 30th Street Station. While that station, currently the only Amtrak stop in the city, would  remain active under the NEC Futures plans, Maits was concerned creating a new stop in Center City would minimize 30th Street’s importance and undercut the natural progress of development in the city.

Michael Noda, who writes about transportation at Sic Transit Philadelphia, questioned the value of Amtrak service directly to the airport.

“There just aren’t that many people to take Amtrak for a flight out of Philadelphia,” he said. “Our resources are finite.”

Other comments were more pleas to take into account some of the new realities of transportation. Philadelphia has a growing bike culture, and Bob Previdi, policy coordinator for the Bicycle Coalition of Greater Philadelphia, asked that cyclists’ needs be taken into account. That included making it easier to park bikes at stations, bring bikes on trains and have changes integrate with existing bike infrastructure.

Andy Hamilton, Mid-Atlantic Coordinator for the East Coast Greenway Alliance, hoped trail improvements could piggyback on any rail improvements. Particularly of interest to him was plans for a bridge over the Susquehanna River, he said. Right now there are no crossings specifically for nonmotorized travel, he said.

“You’re building a bridge down there and we’d like to be a part of that,” he said.

There was little debate that the corridor needs major work. About 750,000 people travel some part of the 457-mile route from Boston to Washington D.C. each day on as many as 2,000 passenger trains. The route is now at capacity. Sarah Feinberg, the FRA’s administrator, opened the meeting by noting that the bridges on the rail network date back to the beginning of the 20th Century and some tunnels date back to the Civil War. The proposal simply focused on getting the railroad network to a state of good repair, along with some improvements to capacity and speed, is estimated to cost $65 billion over 25 years.

The FRA will announce a final development plan in spring 2017, and it may be an amalgam of the three proposals on the table, officials said. The period for public comment extends through January 30. Anyone interested in offering ideas on the proposals can email comment@necfuture.com or write to:

NEC FUTURE
U.S. DOT Federal Railroad Administration
One Bowling Green, Suite 429
New York, NY 10004

STATE BY STATE
Home

The New York Times – Editorial:  A New Old Plan for Penn Station
January 8, 2016

You could have gotten dizzy following the bouncing governor, Andrew Cuomo, around New York in the last few days, ahead of his State of the State address next week. To generate excitement about his plans for transportation and infrastructure, he has been leading a road show, spreading proposals one by one, far and wide. Between Proposal 5 (lower Thruway tolls!) and 7 (a bigger Javits Convention Center!), was one to make a New Yorker perk up: Proposal 6, transforming Penn Station.

Whoa, say the commuters who have lived with, and hated, Penn Station since the old one was razed in 1963. Generations of them have worn ruts in the floor and holes in their souls trudging the low corridors of the Long Island Rail Road concourse, whose ceilings gush when it rains. Picture a minimum-security prison that sells magazines and popcorn, or a rat colony under martial law, and you’ll have a pretty good idea of what needs fixing.

The germ of Mr. Cuomo’s plan was championed long ago by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who died in 2003. It involves moving one tenant, Amtrak, to the grand Farley Post Office across Eighth Avenue and then renovating the Penn dungeon for the L.I.R.R., New Jersey Transit and the subways. Though developers were chosen and plans drawn up, and the first phase of work — on ventilation, stairs and corridors — is underway, the overall project has been stalled.

Now Mr. Cuomo wants to revive it, though in what form is still not certain. There are several possibilities. Nobody, sadly, is talking about moving Madison Square Garden, which sits upon Penn Station like a manhole cover, blocking light and air. The grandest idea the governor outlined includes a new sunlight-drenched station entrance on Eighth Avenue, but that requires getting rid of a 5,600-seat theater under the Garden. Other options include a more modest entrance on 33rd Street, or simply tidying up the inside without any “major external changes” at all.

Beyond aesthetic improvements, the real need is to increase capacity at Penn Station, which was not built to handle 650,000 passengers a day. The test will be to see what flesh is put on these and other proposals that have been flying from the governor’s mouth and press office. Mr. Cuomo, who seems to have gone from zero to Robert Moses in 60 seconds, is also talking about building a third L.I.R.R. track on part of the Main Line in Nassau County and digging a tunnel to connect Long Island to points north. He will get no complaint from New Yorkers who like it when governors tackle big infrastructure. Now he needs to fully explain with what money, and — the forever question — when?

Politico New York - Cuomo aide: Infrastructure plan will cost $100 billion
January 11, 2016
Dana Rubinstein

Gov. Andrew Cuomo's infrastructure plans for New York state will cost $100 billion and create more than 250,000 jobs, according to Bill Mulrow, the governor's secretary, who unleashed those enormous numbers during a Monday afternoon speech to construction industry executives at the Mandarin Oriental.

"This is a $100 billion program,” Mulrow told the New York Building Congress. It would be, he said, "the largest development in New York since Robert Moses." He said Cuomo would formally unveil the program at his combined State of the State address and budget message in Albany on Wednesday. 

Cuomo has spent the last week or so touting the state's investments in roads, bridges, subways, airports, a rail tunnel, a convention center, a train station, and so on.

He has yet to explain how he would pay for those projects.

Nor did Mulrow explain how the $100 billion figure was arrived at, or what span of time it encompasses.

Following Mulrow's remarks, two reporters tried to ask him how the state was planning to pay for the projects.

Mulrow replied by saying, “State of the State, budget,” referring to Cuomo's combined State of the State and budget address on Wednesday.

A reporter said it wasn't clear that the source of that $100 billion would be contained in Cuomo's budget presentation either.

“Is there a hint of skepticism there?” responded Mulrow, smiling.

Main Line Today (PA) - Can a New Train Station Transform Paoli?
January 11, 2016
J.F. Pirro

When interviewed on Comcast Newsmakers a few years back, Ed Auble was asked what image provided the most fitting depiction of Paoli. His answer? The dilapidated ’50s-era train station—and how it isn’t reflective of what the town has been, or could be.

Even now that planning and design are well underway for the impressively named Paoli Intermodal Transportation Center, it still may not be enough to keep Paoli from remaining the Main Line’s redheaded stepchild. It’s not an unfair metaphor, sources agree.

“You drive through Paoli, and we’re a community of concrete, brick and asphalt,” says Auble. “We’re Route 30—a racetrack, except during rush hour. The transportation center is wonderful. We’ve been asking for it for years.”

An insurance-agency owner in town since the mid-1980s, Auble is a past two-time president of the Paoli Business and Professional Association. “By 2021-22, we’ll have a nice transportation center, but what are we doing for the community around it?” he poses. “There’s no village green or town center. No one is walking in Paoli; it doesn’t happen. We need more restaurants, some bigger draw. I don’t want Paoli to be known only as the place where people can get on the train.”

The reality is that many people board in Paoli. The Amtrak-owned station serves about 1,300 passengers daily. Dating back to 1893, its Victorian-style depot was replaced in 60 years later—and hasn’t been significantly altered since. In 2013, Paoli served 175,300 Amtrak riders and 738,000 SEPTA passengers—the most riders in any station in the western suburbs. It’s also one of the busiest in the metropolitan area and in the state. It’s so bustling that the building and parking facilities can no longer accommodate the volume. Paoli merchants remain frustrated by commuters consuming the limited downtown spaces, while buses and shuttles squeeze into cramped parking lots adjacent to the station.

Three distinct construction phases are planned for the existing station at the corner of Lancaster Avenue and North Valley Road. Beginning this year, accessibility improvements will bring the station into compliance with 2006 Department of Transportation Accessibility standards and the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The project will include a new high-level center platform, elevators and ramps, a pedestrian overpass, parking lot improvements, ADA improvements to the existing building, and upgraded rail infrastructure. 

Slated to begin in 2019, the second phase will replace the existing bridge on North Valley Road over the rail lines with a new one that redirects the road to the intersection of Route 30 and Darby Road. This will finally combine all the parking areas and jitney operations on the north side of the tracks.

The final phase involves a new, expanded transportation center, an additional high-level platform on the outbound side, a waiting area, ticket offices and passenger amenities, enhanced bus facilities, and a 600-plus-space commuter-parking garage. Plans may also incorporate retail storefronts. Completion is expected sometime in 2022.

“But we can be better than a new train-station stop,” says Auble. “There’s a great sense of pride here.”

Paoli will never be Ardmore or Wayne—Auble knows this. But it is a good community, with good bones and good people, and the 85-member business association is a major leadership group. Currently, it’s exploring a Business Improvement District and funding a Paoli 2025 vision plan. “People want to come back into Paoli, to live in a condo, apartment or maybe a home here,” says Auble, who chaired Paoli’s 250th birthday celebration a decade ago. “One of two partners wants to walk to a train station and not need a car.”

A new Paoli master plan could evolve. But there are roadblocks, says Zach Barner, planning and zoning coordinator for Tredyffrin Township—namely odd-angled major intersections. Plus, the north side of Lancaster Avenue is confined by the railroad tracks. “Wayne can be more creative, and West Chester has more of a grid to work with,” Barner says. “Transit is something we can bank on if Paoli is to become more important and keep growing. But we can’t keep adding cars to the system. Getting people in and out of Paoli—transportation—is a big part of that.”

In 1984, SEPTA, Amtrak, the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission, Chester County, and Tredyffrin and Willistown townships first explored alternative sites for a relocation and upgrade of the Paoli station. It resulted in 1996’s Paoli Rail Yard and Transportation Center Plan, and then the Paoli Community Master Plan in 2001. Both had the new station on the other side of North Valley Road, across from the existing site.

In the end, SEPTA, Amtrak and PennDOT decided to stick with the current site. Meanwhile, Tredyffrin and other stakeholders have undertaken a study to outline various intersection, pedestrian and streetscape improvements aimed at creating a “sense of place in Paoli,” Barner says, plus increasing pedestrian safety and traffic circulation. The group’s Paoli Road Improvement Feasibility Study & Public Participation Project won a 2015 award from the state chapter of the American Planning Association. “It will be our best chance in at least a generation to deal with station accessibility, parking, and traffic issues that have grown commensurately with our township, county and region,” says Stephen Aichele, who chairs the Paoli Task Force, an aforementioned stakeholder.

An eighth-generation resident and a longtime area realtor, Andy Wilson sees other hurdles for Paoli. “The big problem is that the [residential] development on Valley Road curtails business expansion, and now Darby Road is the only area that can be expanded in the business district. From Plank Avenue to Del Chevrolet, you’re looking at a city, but it’s not breathing, and so no one is motivated to come into Paoli to shop. It’s still a bedroom community with train access to Philadelphia, and not a business community. The biggest problem with Paoli is that we’re at the tail end [of the traditional Main Line], and also the butt end of the township.”

Planner Zach Barner has only been with the township for two years, but he grasps the intensity of the longtime public support for a new train station in Paoli, a hub with subpar facilities.

After 30 years, a court mandate finally prompted action, following lawsuits filed against Amtrak for not having fully compliant stations to serve those with disabilities. After a 20-year grace period designated by federal ADA legislation in 1990, Amtrak now has to address these access issues, agreeing to complete upgrades in Paoli by the end of 2018. It’s splitting the $36 million expense with SEPTA and PennDOT—a new frontier of collaboration, and a costly one. 

Requests for proposals for the Darby Road bridge portion of the project went out in November 2015. Intermodal Transportation Center costs are cited in SEPTA’s long-range capital budget as some $100 million. “Every time they looked at it, they said, ‘It will cost too much, so let it ride for now,’” Wilson says. “Now, it’s still going to cost money.” 

Station plans are already having a positive impact. The Tudor building at 2 W. Lancaster Ave., catty-corner to the existing station, is being restored and redeveloped by KingsHaven Property Development as Bennington Apartments and Commercial Properties, with luxury residential units and commercial storefronts. The plan includes a flagship retail space for KingsHaven Design, a resource for architects and the public, with high-end home accessories, furniture and antiques. “The Main Line has continued to extend westward over the last 40 years, and we believe it’s time for Paoli to come into its own as a real destination town,” says KingsHaven Design’s CEO, Lauren Wylonis. 

There are also plans for the 30-townhome Village Square on South Valley Road and rumblings about other projects, including meetings with a company interested in Station Square redevelopment. “It seems like there’s renewed interest in Paoli, and the train station only makes the area more desirable,” Barner says. “Now that there’s finally movement, it’s a high-priority project for the region, as well.”

That’s where P. Timothy Phelps comes in. Phelps is the executive director of the Malvern-based Transportation Management Association of Chester County, an advocacy bridge between private and public sectors that focuses on congestion mitigation and air quality with a goal of getting commuters out of cars and into alternative modes. He sees the new transportation center as an opportunity for the whole county. “It’s not only about getting people into Center City, but how we can get them from the western part of the county into Great Valley,” he says. “It’s not a one-way, inbound discussion; it’s about broadening people’s perspectives on how a station can serve the county.”

Three years ago, a TMACC study found that a third of Vanguard’s employees were commuting from areas west of Exton. The transportation center represents an opportunity to improve workforce development for the Great Valley region, not to mention a convenience for those who live in, say, Parkesburg, Coatesville and Downingtown. Because of its location, Paoli is also a user-friendly station for Delaware County residents.

There’s been public outreach to help ease worries of traffic disruptions during construction and what will surely be property acquisitions along East and West Central avenues, especially as part of the second phase. Tredyffrin Township has studied roads that feed into the station area to look at realigning intersections for flow. “We have to work together, so it’s a fair vision that incorporates the public’s wish list,” Barner says.

Brad Zerr remembers exactly the same station as a kid. “It hasn’t changed in all these years,” says the lifelong Paoli resident, who works in community health services at Paoli Hospital and is the current president of the business association. 

Zerr wouldn’t say much, because the project has to unfold. Even so, like others, he’s concerned about traffic flow and parking, green space, new businesses, and safe walkways. Nor would he say if it would have any effect on Paoli Hospital. “Some of the beauty is that no one really knows what it will look like,” says Zerr.

Greg Prichard grew up in Wayne, within walking distance of its station. After studying industrial design at Carnegie Mellon University and historic preservation planning at Cornell, he joined the board of the Radnor Historical Society. 

Prichard focused on Main Line train stations for his Cornell master’s thesis. Fittingly, he’s been a guest of Tredyffrin Historic Preservation Trust. His presentation there and elsewhere detailed local station architecture and history, and it concludes with Paoli.

Historically the end of the line, its large rail yard once housed and repaired cars. In modern times, it became a superfund site better known for environmental contamination. Initially, it was considered as a site for the new station. “In Merion, Wynnewood and Wayne, communities added window boxes, planted flowers, replaced roofs, and redid shelters,” says Prichard, who’s now involved with a group trying to save the Devon station. “In Paoli, I’m not sure there’s the same community spirit.”

Until now, Paoli has been like a railcar stuck in a repair yard. It’s been sleeping, but it’s still very much a part of a system that defines the Main Line, where the towns grew around their stations. “Now, it’s up to communities to define how they want their gateway buildings to be maintained,” Prichard says.    

“When you see a rundown station, you may think a certain way. The stations inform impressions, yet they are no longer maintained by the world’s largest corporation (the Pennsylvania Railroad) like they were years ago.”

Main Line stations were once so well-maintained because the railroad executives lived around them into the 1950s. But even by then, at least one executive living in Ardmore preferred to be chauffeured to work rather than take the rails.

“There was a change in attitude,” Prichard says. “For those of us who can still walk to a station, it should be beneficial to take ownership. In a way, they’re owned by everybody. Shops change owners, uses are modified, but the stations remain the same. They’re that single entity that controls something in each town. Each town can sculpt and mold the way it wants to be presented by beginning with its station.”




3


