 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 28, 2016
TV & RADIO
Florida's TriRail derails after striking debris on tracks	2
One injured in TriRail derailment north of Ft. Lauderdale	2
Unknown if speed a factor in TriRail derailment in Fl.	2
FRA says derailments on the increase, CP disagrees	2
CP says one rail tank car leaked some soybean oil into Mississippi	2
FRA says archeological site on proposed UP construction site could be included on National Historic Sites	2
CARS releases statement on CP derailment	2
Investigators have cause of sulfuric acid train derailment	3
Safety campaign begins as 80 miles of track is reactivated in S.C.	3
One dead after Amtrak train vs. car collision	3
Women and child injured after train vs car collision	3
NATIONAL NEWS
Railway Age - AAR issues first-ever ‘State of the Industry Report’	3
Progressive Railroading - AAR details safety investments in first 'state of the industry' report	4
PTC
SEPTA to roll out PTC system in February	5
RAIL INCIDENTS
Star Tribune (MN) - S. Minnesota train derailment sends 6 cars into Mississippi	6
Winona Daily News - CP train derails in Houston County; cars in water near Brownsville, no leak reported	6
MLive (MI) - One person dead after Amtrak train strikes vehicle; no train passengers hurt	8
HIGH SPEED RAIL
Twin Cities Pioneer Press (MN) - Plan for Twin Cities-Rochester passenger rail line stalls out	9
Associated Press - Official: High-speed rail likely to cost less, but take longer than thought	10
AMTRAK
Associated Press - $4.5M award to Amtrak upheld in deadly Nevada truck crash	10
Forbes - It's Time To Rebuild New York's Original Penn Station	11
CROSSING NEWS
QNS (NY) - Safety measures implemented at site of fiery train collision in Maspeth	13
STATE BY STATE
Journal Sentinel (WI) - Public access to Mississippi River derailed	14
The Baltimore Sun - Baltimore, CSX reach $1.2 million settlement in E. 26th Street collapse	17


TV & RADIO
Home
Florida's TriRail derails after striking debris on tracks
WSVN-MIA (FOX) - Miami, FL

One injured in TriRail derailment north of Ft. Lauderdale
WPEC (CBS) - West Palm Beach, FL

Unknown if speed a factor in TriRail derailment in Fl.
KVOA (NBC) - Tucson, AZ

FRA says derailments on the increase, CP disagrees 
WQOW (ABC) - La Crosse, WI

CP says one rail tank car leaked some soybean oil into Mississippi
WKBT (CBS) - La Crosse, WI

FRA says archeological site on proposed UP construction site could be included on National Historic Sites
WICD (ABC) - Champaign, IL

CARS releases statement on CP derailment
WQOW (ABC) - La Crosse, WI

Investigators have cause of sulfuric acid train derailment 
KGO-SF (ABC) - San Francisco, CA

Safety campaign begins as 80 miles of track is reactivated in S.C.
WMBF (NBC) - Myrtle Beach, SC

One dead after Amtrak train vs. car collision
WLAJ (ABC) - Lansing, MI

Women and child injured after train vs car collision
KTBS-SHV (ABC) - Shreveport, LA

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Railway Age - AAR issues first-ever ‘State of the Industry Report’
January 27, 2016
Carolina Worrell

The Association of American Railroads (AAR) on Jan. 27, 2016 released its first “State of the Industry Report” focusing on the key challenges, accomplishments and innovations within the freight railroad industry. This initial, five-chapter edition details the industry’s investments in new technology and innovation that are enhancing safety across the nation’s rail network.

The reports are designed to inform lawmakers, the business community and the public about the freight railroad industry’s top priorities. This edition features the input of experts such as John Tunna, Director of the Federal Railroad Administration’s (FRA) Office of Research & Development and Tony Sultana, a Principal Investigator at the Transportation Technology Center Inc. (TTCI).

“Our industry maintains its leadership position through innovations designed to improve the performance of our employees, our equipment and even the rail itself,” said AAR President and CEO, Edward R. Hamberger. “This new report outlines how the railroad industry provides innovative, on-the-ground technologies and community programs that safeguard our customers’ cargo, the communities we serve and our employees.”

The report focuses on items such as safety investment, the role of “big data” in diagnosing and solving problems, the continued commitment by the rail industry to implement Positive Train Control (PTC) technology as quickly and effectively as possible, emerging technologies such as drones and community-based training and outreach.

Through input from experts like Tunna and Sultana, as well as The Security and Emergency Response Center (SERTC), Railinc and AskRail, AAR shows how the industry is continuing to address safety in an industry where the train accident rate has fallen 45% since 2000 and 80% since 1980.

“The exciting thing right now is that technology is moving into the transportation field at a rapid rate,” Tunna said in the report.

The report showcases new safety advancements that the industry is taking. For instance, technologists are developing a sophisticated ultrasonic detection system that allows a better view into steel rail to locate track defects before they can cause problems. The industry is also investigating the use of unmanned aerial vehicles—or drones —for inspection of track, bridge and other freight rail infrastructure, as well as monitoring air quality.

Hamberger says the ultimate takeaway from AAR’s first State of the Industry Report is clear: an increased emphasis on rail network investments —$25 billion annually over the last five years on average—collaboration with customers and government and the development of new technologies combine to improve safety.

“The sweeping reduction in freight rail accidents and injuries over the last several decades is the result of stepped-up employee training as well as a dedicated team of safety experts who conduct rigorous research, examine problems in new ways, apply technological advances and novel changes to processes that ultimately make a safe system of transportation even safer,” said Hamberger. “We are proud of the industry’s efforts, including those highlighted in this report, and look forward to promoting more developments in the future.”

The AAR will issue multiple such reports each year, including two more in 2016, with each individual report focusing on a particular theme.

Progressive Railroading - AAR details safety investments in first 'state of the industry' report
January 27, 2016

The Association of American Railroads (AAR) today released the first of its "state of the industry" reports focusing on rail industry challenges and accomplishments.

The initial five-chapter edition details the industry's investments in new technology and innovation designed to enhance safety across the U.S. rail network, AAR officials said in a press release.

The association will issue two additional reports this year, with each focusing on a different theme.

The reports are intended to inform lawmakers, the business community and the public about top priorities for the freight-rail industry, AAR officials said.

"Our industry maintains its leadership position through innovations designed to improve the performance of our employees, our equipment and even the rail itself," said AAR President and Chief Executive Officer Edward Hamberger. "This new report outlines how the railroad industry provides innovative, on-the-ground technologies and community programs that safeguard our customers' cargo, the communities we serve and our employees." 

The report issued today also focuses on the role of "big data" in diagnosing and solving problems, the industry's commitment to implement positive train control "as quickly and effectively as possible," emerging technologies such as drones, and community-based training and outreach, AAR officials said.

Among the new safety advances discussed in the report is an ultrasonic detection system that allows a better view into steel rail to locate track defects before they can cause problems. Additionally, the industry is exploring the use of drones for inspection of track, bridge and other infrastructure, as well as for monitoring air quality.

The report also notes that the train accident rate has fallen by 79 percent compared with 1980.

PTC
Home
SEPTA to roll out PTC system in February
January 27, 2016

The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) anticipates rolling out its positive train control (PTC) system in February.

The agency intended to meet the federal government's original Dec. 31, 2015, deadline for implementing the technology, but the three-year extension passed by Congress late last year "effectively resets the clock on [SEPTA's] deadline for the final phases of the project," SEPTA said in a January PTC update on its website.

As currently proposed, SEPTA's implementation of the technology on its Regional Rail lines will occur in three phases, with each phase taking several weeks to complete. During the first phase, the agency will deploy PTC on single track service, beginning with the Warminster Line, SEPTA officials said.

For the remaining phases, the agency will deploy PTC on two track service lines, followed by deployment on multi-track service lines.

The agency has completed work on its signal and communication systems, as well as its car fit-out on the Silverliner IV and Silverliner V fleets. SEPTA now is focused on completing fit-out for electric locomotives/cab cars, which is scheduled to wrap up in early February; control center software installation; and employee training.

Additionally, SEPTA is testing cars to see how its PTC system interfaces with Amtrak's. 

The rollout schedule is designed to give the agency time to react and make adjustments as needed, SEPTA officials said.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Star Tribune (MN) - S. Minnesota train derailment sends 6 cars into Mississippi
January 28, 2016
Paul Walsh

A freight train derailed late Tuesday, sending several cars into the Mississippi River.

A freight train derailed late at night in southeastern Minnesota, sending six cars into the Mississippi River, authorities said Wednesday.

The derailment of 15 cars in total from the southbound Canadian Pacific train occurred about 10 p.m. Tuesday near Reno in Houston County, a CP spokesman said.

“None of the cars in the river contained dangerous goods, and it does not appear that any have leaked,” spokesman Andy Cummings said.

One of the cars that derailed and remained on land lost a saltlike product known as sodium chlorate, a material that is classified as dangerous, Cummings said.

“A very small amount of this product leaked when a cap fell off a railcar,” he said, “but none has reached the river.”

Also on some of the derailed cars was vegetable oil, which did not leak, according to a county official.

A hazardous materials teams remained at the scene as daybreak arrived.

The tracks run parallel to the river and Hwy. 26, which was closed for a time overnight and later reopened but limited to one lane being shared by traffic in each direction under the supervision of flaggers as of late Wednesday morning.


Winona Daily News - CP train derails in Houston County; cars in water near Brownsville, no leak reported
January 27, 2016

A southbound Canadian Pacific freight train derailed Tuesday night in Houston County, Minn., sending six cars into the Mississippi River.

The derailment occurred around 10 p.m. about three miles south of Brownsville.

The cars in the river, which were carrying soybean oil, do not appear to have leaked, said CP spokesman Andy Cummings.

Cummings said a small amount of sodium chlorate powder spilled from one of the 15 derailed cars but none of the chemical reached the river.

Canadian Pacific crews and contractors are assessing the scene.

"CP takes this incident extremely seriously," Cummings said. "Safety will be our top priority."

The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Coast Guard are also responding. The Federal Railroad Administration has a mechanical inspector on site and has dispatched others to the scene, said deputy regional administrator Michael Bodah.

It could take months for the FRA to determine a cause, Bodah said.

Sabrina Chandler, refuge manager for the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge, said U.S. Fish and Wildlife officials are on scene as railroad contractors do tests to determine if any of the submerged cars are leaking.

"We always have a concern if there's anything going in the river that's not supposed to be there," Chandler said. "With any kind of oil, even a natural oil, there's always concern about oxygen depletion."

Canadian Pacific had two derailments in Minnesota during 2015, according to the FRA's accident database, which includes incidents through the end of October. Both occurred at relatively slow speeds and did not result in major damages or hazardous material spills.

A CP train carrying crude oil derailed Nov. 8 in Watertown, Wis. No injuries were reported in the incident.

On Nov. 7, about 25 cars on a BNSF freight train derailed near Alma, Wis., spilling up to 20,000 gallons of ethanol into the Mississippi River backwaters. No injuries were reported, and the tracks were back in service after three days.

In December, nearly six weeks after the incident, a BNSF spokesperson said there were no signs of adverse impacts to fish or wildlife at the Alma derailment site.

The incident prompted several Wisconsin legislators to request action on the larger issue rail safety, given a spike in train traffic in the area.

MLive (MI) - One person dead after Amtrak train strikes vehicle; no train passengers hurt
January 27, 2016
Benjamin Raven

GRASS LAKE, MI ­— One person is dead following a Wednesday afternoon, Jan. 27 crash with an Amtrak passenger train. 

Police say the driver appears to have ignored the audible signal and crossing arms at the train tracks at E. Michigan Avenue and Willis Road in Grass Lake Charter Township.

The driver was the only occupant of the vehicle. 

Police have not released any information regarding the driver's identity as of 3 p.m. Wednesday. 

No train passengers were injured in the crash, Jackson County Sheriff Steve Rand reports. The sheriff also confirmed that Amtrak officials are aware of the incident.

"Four Amtrak workers were in the area of the Willis Road rail crossing as a westbound Amtrak train approached the area," a press release from the sheriff's office reads. "According to these witnesses, the audible signal and crossing arms were working as the train neared Willis Road."

As of 2:30 p.m., passengers could be seen seated on the train as it rests on the tracks along E. Michigan Avenue. There is visible damage to the front of the Amtrak passenger train.

The vehicle, a black Ford sedan, was heavily damaged with debris scattered along the 0.5 miles between Craft and Willis roads.

A portion of the vehicle's bumper could be seen near the train tracks where the collision occurred while another sizable piece of debris could be seen near the Craft Road intersection. 

Rand told a Citizen Patriot reporter that E. Michigan Avenue at Willis between Craft roads is expected to be closed for the next three hours. Michigan State Police, Grass Lake Township Fire Department and Jackson Community Ambulance are at the scene with deputies from the sheriff's department. 

The sheriff's office accident reconstruction team remains at the scene of the incident.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
Twin Cities Pioneer Press (MN) - Plan for Twin Cities-Rochester passenger rail line stalls out
January 27, 2016

The proposed publicly funded Zip Rail high-speed passenger line from the Twin Cities to Rochester may have hit a dead end.

A lack of funds — and interest in a similar project by the private sector — could mean an end to the state’s study process.

Public funding to advance the Zip Rail to an environmental impact study phase has run out, said Dan Krom, director of MnDOT’s Passenger Rail Office. He said a decision to suspend the project is being considered by MnDOT in partnership with Olmsted County Regional Railroad Authority.
“We’re just kind of laying things out for the decision makers for moving forward,” Krom said, adding MnDOT’s newly released Alternatives Analysis report can be revisited in the next few years if interest in the project returns.

The Minnesota-based North American High-Speed Rail Group has announced separate plans for a privately funded high-speed rail line in the Zip Rail study area.

MnDOT’s latest 166-page analysis report, a follow-up to a document released in early 2015, analyzes the eight most feasible corridors for Zip Rail based on travel time and potential disruption to communities and the environment. The routes — as well as a no-build option — are recommended for additional study.

Six of the alternatives would begin at Union Depot in St. Paul and two at Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport. Trains would connect to downtown Rochester roughly following U.S. 52 or Minnesota 56, with a possible station in Coates.

Zip Rail was initiated by Olmsted County Regional Railroad Authority and MnDOT in collaboration with the Federal Railroad Administration. The stated goals of the project are to improve safety and convenience while connecting the Twin Cities to Mayo Clinic and other medical and technology destinations in Rochester.

Release of the analysis report comes the same week advisory committees will meet to discuss the controversial project. Zip Rail has faced strong opposition from southeastern Minnesota residents who say tracks would divide farmland and roads between the two metropolitan areas.

The Zip Rail Technical Advisory Committee and Community Advisory Committee — set up to provide input during the study process — will meet Thursday at the state Transportation Building in St Paul.

Associated Press - Official: High-speed rail likely to cost less, but take longer than thought
January 27, 2016
Juliet Williams

SACRAMENTO – The chairman of the board that oversees California’s high-speed rail project said Wednesday that the next projection will likely lower the cost from the current $68billion, but he is less confident about its current predictions for how quickly the system can be built.

Board Chairman Dan Richard and other officials were called to testify at an Assembly hearing on the project’s cost projections and other concerns of lawmakers.

“There are a range of uncertainties here, so I can’t look you in the eye and tell you it will be $68 billion. I will tell you this: When you see our new business plan, the number’s going to be less than $68 billion,” Richard told a Republican lawmaker who has been critical of the project.

“I’m more confident about the dollars, sir, than about the time. It may take us a little longer to do this than we said,” Richard added.

The 2014 business plan said the first 520-mile phase linking the Bay Area to Greater Los Angeles would be finished in 2028, but construction has been beset by delays in acquiring land in the Central Valley and by slow-going environmental approvals.

AMTRAK
Home
Associated Press - $4.5M award to Amtrak upheld in deadly Nevada truck crash
January 27, 2016

RENO, Nev. (AP) — A federal judge has refused to grant a new trial for a Nevada trucking company ordered to pay more than $4.5 million in damages to Amtrak after a truck slammed into a passenger train at a rural highway crossing in 2011, killing six people.

A U.S. District Court jury in Reno returned the verdict in September 2014 against the Battle Mountain-based John Davis Trucking.

The jurors concluded the truck driver who was killed along with five people on the California Zephyr was primarily to blame for the fiery crash in northern Nevada's high desert about 60 miles northeast of Reno.

Lawyers for the trucking company argued in a motion for a rehearing that Judge Howard McKibben should have instructed the jury to consider evidence suggesting a faulty signal and crossing gate could have contributed to the collision on U.S. Highway 95 just south of U.S. Interstate 80.

McKibben ruled Monday the verdict — which also awarded more than $210,000 to the Union Pacific Railroad for damage to the tracks — was a reasonable one.

John Davis Trucking "received a fair trial," McKibben wrote in a 4-page order, adding that the company's motion was "comprised largely of arguments it has already raised — some repeatedly — and which the court has already decided."

"The verdicts were not contrary to the clear weight of the evidence, the damages were reasonable and supported by the evidence and there is no basis for concluding that the jury was presented with false or perjurious evidence," he said.

The National Transportation Safety Board concluded in December 2012 that the probable cause of the accident was an inattentive trucker with a history of speeding violations driving an empty tractor-trailer with faulty brakes.

Forbes - It's Time To Rebuild New York's Original Penn Station
January 27, 2016
Justin Shubow

The great American urban planner Daniel Burnham said, “Make no little plans; they have no magic to stir men’s blood.” Governor Andrew Cuomo heeded that call earlier this month, when he announced a visionary plan for overhauling New York’s widely hated Pennsylvania Station.

The busiest transit hub in the country with 650,000 commuter rail and Amtrak riders per day, Penn Station, built in 1968, is not only dysfunctional, it is the most hated train station in America. As the governor observed, “Penn Station is un-New York. It is dark, it is constrained, it is ugly, it is dated architecture, it is a lost opportunity… Frankly it is a miserable experience… It is a terrible impression” of New York.

He contrasted the current station, which sits beneath Madison Square Garden, with the one it replaced: a Beaux-Arts masterpiece designed by McKim, Mead & White, which opened in 1910. As magnificent as Grand Central Terminal, it was modelled on the ancient Roman Baths of Caracalla, and possessed soaring 150-foot-tall vaulted ceilings clad in marble. Cuomo noted that the original station had “majesty” and was “the grand and triumphant entrance that New York deserved.” A gift to the city from the privately owned railroad, it was an awe-inspiring public space that elevated the common man.

Alas, in 1963 the station was demolished. In an editorial at the time, the New York Times called it a “monumental act of vandalism,” an opinion seconded in more recent years by Michael Kimmelman, the paper’s present-day architecture critic. The widespread consensus is that the replacement of the original Penn Station by the current one was one of the great architectural and civic crimes of the 20th century.

To fix the many problems with the current station, the governor has called for a $3-billion public-private partnership that will extensively renovate the transportation depot, and connect it via tunnels to the new Amtrak Station to be built across Eighth Avenue in the old Farley Post Office (also designed by McKim, Mead & White). The two buildings would be called the Empire State Complex. Although civic design advocates such as the Municipal Arts Society and Regional Planning Association hope that a renovated Penn Station would include moving the eyesore Madison Square Garden to a different site, in the Cuomo proposal the arena would remain where it is.

Cuomo has given developers 90 days to submit proposals for the site. According to the architectural renderings, the renovations will include a sweeping glass curtain-wall entrance on Eighth Avenue. There will also be other new entrances and interiors that consist of slick glass boxes.

Unfortunately the architecture, like so much of what is built today, is banal and generic. Lacking any artistry or ties to New York, the new design is one-part contemporary corporate office building, one-part high-end shopping mall.  The proposal is reminiscent of the (architecturally superior) shops at the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle, which are fronted by a glass curtain-wall.  Majestic it is not.

Architectural historian Vince Scully famously said about the difference between the old and new Penn Station, “One entered the city like a god. One scuttles in now like a rat.” The plan the governor released at the press conference replaces the rats with upscale shoppers. And since Madison Square Garden will continue to squat on the station, it will be impossible to design a soaring hall. The renderings are suggestive, not final, plans, but they are indicative of the lack of majesty and monumentality we will almost surely get in any other design.

There is, however, an alternative guaranteed to equal the grandeur and majesty of the original Penn Station—namely, rebuilding the original Penn Station. This is no pipe dream. Based on the original drawings held in the archive of the New-York Historical Society, a team of architects and developers has prepared a master plan showing that such a reconstruction is both practically and economically feasible. It would of course incorporate the latest technology, and would be altered to suit the transportation needs of today, but the essentials of the concourses and exterior would remain. Furthermore, new computer and machining technology would allow the classical details to be constructed quickly and cost-effectively.

Rebuilding Penn Station would require removing Madison Square Garden as well as Two Penn Plaza, an ugly 29-story skyscraper that sits on top of the depot. Selling the air rights would make up for the lost square footage. Alternatively, or in conjunction, Beaux-Arts towers could be added to McKim’s design. (In fact, the Pennsylvania Railroad originally considered putting a hotel on top of it.)

Some will say that rebuilding a demolished structure such as Penn Station is “inauthentic” and fails to respect the “Spirit of our time.” This is a recent architectural ideology unique to the West, one that started gaining purchase after WWII with the rise of Modernism. Demonstrating a different perspective on time and “authenticity,” Japan’s holiest shrine is a wooden temple that for over a millennium has been torn down and rebuilt every 20 years.

Consider: If Grand Central Terminal burned down tomorrow, would we rebuild it? Surely we would. Why should it make a difference that Penn Station was destroyed not yesterday but 53 years ago? Certain masterpieces cannot be improved upon. They are the opposite of dated; they are timeless.

There is precedent for rebuilding demolished great buildings, such as the bombed-out historic centers of Dresden and Warsaw, as well as the 19th-century Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow, which was torn down by Stalin. There is also the Campanile in St. Mark’s Square in Venice, a 16th-century tower that was reconstructed in 1912 after it collapsed. Would Venice be better off without it?

McKim’s Penn Station is part of New York City’s patrimony. It was civic property stolen from New Yorkers, and indeed all Americans, and it should be returned to their rightful heirs: us.

The irony is that while opponents of classical architecture demand “innovation” and “novelty” at all costs, nothing would be more dramatic than rebuilding a magnificent civic temple. It would be an inspiring story of life after death, of urban resurrection.

Governor Cuomo is to be commended for his bold plans to revolutionize New York City’s foremost gateway. Rebuilding Penn Station is the best way to make that transformation a triumph.

CROSSING NEWS
Home
QNS (NY) - Safety measures implemented at site of fiery train collision in Maspeth 
January 27, 2016
Anthony Giudice

Railroad officials hope a sign for train operators will keep things safer at a Maspeth railroad crossing.

A new stop sign has been placed on the tracks at Maspeth Avenue and Rust Street in an effort to prevent another accident such as the one that took place in July 2015, which left the driver of a tractor-trailer hospitalized after a train engine crashed into his truck.

In that accident, according to investigators, a New York and Atlantic Railway (NYA) train engine was traveling at least five miles per hour over the 15 mph speed limit when it hit the truck, which was in the process of passing the four-track crossing on Maspeth Avenue. The tractor-trailer was dragged down the tracks and burst into flames.

The high speed of the train did not allow for the crossing gate to be activated before the truck entered the crossing, it was reported.

The new signage has been placed to remind train crews to stop before entering the crossing. The engine is supposed to stop at an island circuit, which triggers the crossing gate to activate and prevent vehicles from entering the crossing. Only when the gate is down is the train supposed to proceed through the crossing.

“What happened on July 8, 2015 at the Maspeth [Avenue] crossing was that the NYA train didn’t stop as the rules mandated,” according to a statement from Civics United for Railroad and Environmental Solutions (CURES), a civic group seeking better public safety near local train lines. “It blew through the crossing, exceeding the speed limit. It hit the tractor-trailer, which was already in the crossing. The gates were not down because the NYA train had not stopped and triggered them. The truck was dragged a good distance because of the speed of the train.”

After the accident, the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) launched a focused safety review of NYA’s safety culture and management practices. Additional review is ongoing.

According to CURES, a stop sign has also been placed at the 88th Street at-grade crossing of the Long Island Rail Road’s (LIRR) Lower Montauk line in Glendale, which has been a problem for the community for some time.

“There have been numerous complaints about the 88th Street crossing. It’s near a school, so it’s a heavily traveled pedestrian pathway for children, as well as a heavily traveled street,” CURES said. “The problem at this crossing is that the engine was coming into the crossing, very close to cars coming across the tracks, while the gates were still up. People saw the engine and the lights when they were on the tracks and were scared.”

“So these signs were installed, reminding NYA crews to follow the rules,” CURES added. “Let’s hope they work and no one gets hurt again because of a speeding train, crew not following the rules, or lack of appropriate signaling.”

STATE BY STATE
Home
Journal Sentinel (WI) - Public access to Mississippi River derailed
January 27, 2016
Paul A. Smith

As a recreational and ecological resource, the upper Mississippi River is world-class.

Generations of Wisconsinites have enjoyed fishing, hunting, boating and wildlife watching in and around the sloughs, channels and islands formed by the mighty river.

One of the best parts of river life has always been the abundance of public access.

"It's a vast, beautiful area owned by and for the public," said Marc Schultz of Onalaska, a retired UW-Extension resource agent who has lived and worked along the Mississippi for more than 40 years. "It's had a legacy of great access, too."

But a recent series of events has eroded a tradition of public access to the river, causing many in the outdoors community to call for a solution.

At its source: the railroad right of way.

Railroad tracks cover a narrow strip of land along the river's eastern edge.

Although pedestrians had historically been allowed to cross the tracks at any point to access the river, a 2006 change in state law made it illegal. The modification was supported by railroad lobbyists and largely escaped public notice.

And despite an attempt by legislators to provide a recreation-friendly fix in the 2015-'17 state budget, Gov. Scott Walker last year vetoed the provision.

So anglers, hunters and others trying to access the public resource by crossing the railroad tracks at unapproved spots are subject to a charge of criminal trespassing.

"It's a travesty," said Ted Peck, a longtime Mississippi River angler and fishing guide. "The river is the last free place."

The issue has come to a head at various times over the last year, as Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) officials embarked on what they call an "educational campaign."

It has arguably peaked in the last month as ice anglers have been confronted by a BNSF police officer as they attempted to access prime fishing spots along Highway 35 in their customary ways.

The company hired the officer to patrol the Wisconsin portion of its lines.

"We are trying to make sure the public knows the safe and legal areas to cross the railroad tracks, whether public or private," said Amy McBeth, BNSF regional public affairs director.

McBeth said 45 to 53 trains pass down the BNSF route in a typical 24-hour period.

Though the railroad police officer possesses law enforcement authority equal to local police or sheriff departments, no tickets have been issued, according to McBeth.

But the change in state law and BNSF's effort to restrict river access to official crossing points has negatively affected the public.

Anglers say they have crossed the tracks for decades without causing an accident. And there are too few designated crossings.

"Whatever happened to stop, look and listen," Peck said. "Common sense worked for more than 100 years."

According to the Federal Railroad Administration, there are 106 public crossings on 218 miles of BNSF right of way in western Wisconsin. There also are private crossings; BNSF on Wednesday was not able to provide information on the number or locations.

The public is now left with the decision to trespass and risk a ticket, or go to one of the relatively few established crossings.

However, the crossings are often far removed from prime fishing and hunting areas. For ice anglers who often travel on foot, it's a major inconvenience.

And using them could lead to far greater risks than crossing a track.

In one example, ice anglers who want to fish a popular panfish spot called DeSoto Bay would have to go about a mile north to Blackhawk County Park, walk on the ice through Green Lake and then down a narrow channel called Long Slough.

On the way, they would be forced through an area with at least three springs that produce weak, dangerous ice. Knowledgeable fishermen avoid the area.

On the other hand, if the anglers followed their decades-old procedure, the trip would be measured in a few minutes and a couple hundred yards. They would park along the Great River Road, walk a few steps west, cross the railroad tracks, and drop down onto the ice of the pond-like backwater.

Frank Ouimet of Franklin has a cabin in Crawford County and fishes the big river most winter weekends. He has decided to go to the Iowa side this month to avoid the hassle.

"To have one of the best resources in this country essentially being cut off by a set of tracks is just wrong," Ouimet said. "Ice fishermen are not being picked off by trains. I am praying this nonsense stops soon."

Ouimet said last weekend he drove past his favorite ice fishing spots along the river in Crawford and Vernon counties and was shocked by the lack of vehicles. He is convinced the loss of easy access has caused people to stop fishing.

Legislators took a commendable stab at fixing the problem last year. But they have failed to pick up the issue this session while delving the frivolous initiatives such as blaze pink.

It's about time Wisconsin lawmakers crafted a common sense, lasting solution to improve public access to one of the greatest public resources in North America, the Mighty Mississippi.

The Baltimore Sun - Baltimore, CSX reach $1.2 million settlement in E. 26th Street collapse
January 27, 2016
Yvonne Wenger

More than 20 Baltimore families will share $1.2 million as compensation for the collapse of a street in Charles Village nearly two years ago.

The retaining wall that held East 26th Street over railroad tracks failed in April 2014 after heavy rains. Trees, streetlights and cars parked on the street fell to the rails below.

Residents of the block between St. Paul and North Charles streets, some of whom had long complained that the aging street was showing signs of deterioration, were displaced for months.

The city's spending panel voted 5-0 Wednesday to approve the settlement. CSX Transportation will pay about $700,000; the city will contribute $467,000.

City Solicitor George Nilson said the city agreed to share responsibility for the cost of claims filed by residents as part of a deal with the rail company to share the $15 million cost of rebuilding the 120-year-old stone retaining wall.

The new support wall is made of reinforced concrete, with anchors attached to bedrock.

Since the collapse, Nilson said, the city has updated policies for the inspection and maintenance of the walls along railroad cuts throughout Baltimore, and has sorted out who owns the land the walls are built on.

The original agreements, some of which date as far back as the 1800s, vary between rail companies.

"We are even more vigilant and careful to pay attention to the other walls that exist and to make sure the walls are properly maintained, whether they are CSX walls or Amtrak walls," Nilson said.

Nilson said the East 26th Street settlement approved Wednesday by the Board of Estimates was reached after "fairly lengthy negotiations." He said it forestalled "another two or three years" of litigation.

Families could receive money as early as next month. Payouts range from about $40,000 to about $70,000. The exact number of families to receive compensation was not immediately available.

A spokesman for CSX said the agreement requires the rail company to maintain the new wall. It is to be inspected at least once a year and have maintenance and engineering employees monitor it.

"Safety is CSX's highest priority and zero accidents is our goal," spokesman Rob Doolittle said in a statement. "We invest more than $1 billion annually on the maintenance of our infrastructure to help ensure the safety of the communities where we operate, our employees and the freight entrusted to us."

Attorney Hassan Murphy, who represents about 20 of the residents, declined to comment, citing a non-disparagement clause in the settlement.

Residents claimed the collapse caused property damage, economic losses and injuries. Retired Baltimore City Circuit Court Judge Carol E. Smith oversaw the arbitration.

Cellphone video of the wall's dramatic collapse went viral.

The city put residents in hotels and helped them pay for transportation and food. The street was rebuilt and opened to traffic last May.

The street was placed on the city's list of capital projects in 2013; there were plans to rebuild it in 2015.

In a report issued in August 2014, the city said neither CSX nor city maintenance crews who reviewed resident complaints before the collapse had the expertise to identify that surface issues were symptomatic of a larger failure to come. The city found an unusually cold and wet winter was a factor in the disaster, but it did not conclusively say what caused it.

City officials have pledged to conduct ground testing of streets that receive more than one complaint and to review aging infrastructure after major rainstorms.


3


