 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 8, 2016
TV & RADIO
CA Governor Brown Releases New Budget for High Speed Rail	2
City Meets for Quiet Zone Proposal	2
Railroad Bridge the Cause of 101 Truck Accidents	2
Woman Injured After Falling Into Manhole on Railroad Bridge	2
International Student Falls Victim to Railroad Accident	2
PTC
Palm Beach Post - Editorial: Railroads should look into tech fix for car-train crashes	2
RAIL INCIDENTS
The Times Picayune (LA) - Amtrak train hits truck in Kenner Thursday afternoon	4
ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
TC Palm (FL) - All Aboard Florida receives 1-year extension to sell $1.75 billion of tax-free bonds	4
Palm Beach Post (FL) - All Aboard Florida receives 2nd bond extension	6
AMTRAK
WAMU 88.5 - More Rides, Shorter Trips: Agency Offers 3 Plans To Improve Northeast Corridor	7
USA Today - Justice IG: DEA paid Amtrak employees nearly $1 million as informants	9
The Washington Times - DEA paid $850,000 for information Amtrak employee was obligated to share anyway	10
WWLTV (LA) - Amtrak says they can't accommodate woman and her wheelchair	11
WBUR (MA) - Amtrak CEO: ‘We Have A Safe Rail System’	12
STATE BY STATE
The Inquirer – Editorial:  Ready for a makeover	13
The Star Press (IN) - City's quiet zone set to begin	14
Hartford Courant (CT) - Shore Line East Will Send Trains To Hartford Line, Get New Fleet	15
TV & RADIO
Home
CA Governor Brown Releases New Budget for High Speed Rail
KNSD-SD (NBC) - San Diego, CA

City Meets for Quiet Zone Proposal
WDJT-MILW (CBS) - Milwaukee, WI

Railroad Bridge the Cause of 101 Truck Accidents 
WVIT-HFD (NBC) - Hartford-New Haven, CT

Woman Injured After Falling Into Manhole on Railroad Bridge
NEWS12NJ - Newark, NJ

International Student Falls Victim to Railroad Accident
KOCO-OKC (ABC) - Oklahoma City, OK

PTC
Home
Palm Beach Post - Editorial: Railroads should look into tech fix for car-train crashes
January 7, 2016

Monday’s crash of a Tri-Rail train into a stalled garbage truck was about as bad as it gets for the commuter line.

Twenty-two passengers were injured, though none seriously. The train derailed — the first time that has happened, Tri-Rail spokeswoman Bonnie Arnold said, in the nearly 16 years she has been on the job.

The Lake Worth city garbage truck was split in half in the collision. The driver, mercifully, fled the truck just before the train hit, authorities said.

Such accidents are rare on the 72-mile Tri-Rail route. But across America, they’re fairly common. In 2014, the last full year of statistics, there were 2,291 cases of trains hitting cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles and pedestrians at railroad crossings, according to the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA).

Those crashes left 224 people dead, including 10 in Florida, and more than 850 injured.

“The basic problem is that a train takes a long time to come to a halt. A freight train going 55 miles per hour needs about a mile to stop after the engineer applies the full brake. Tri-Rail, at top speed of 79 mph, requires “up to three football fields,” Arnold told The Post Editorial Board.

And how is the engineer supposed to know there’s a vehicle on the tracks up ahead? By eyesight? That’s asking a lot of a human operator, especially at night or in a rainstorm. Shouldn’t there be technological fix for this?

There is. Since the late 1990s, Amtrak has been using a system called “Smart Crossing” at six road crossings in Connecticut. It uses four gates to block traffic from entering the tracks, and sensors embedded in the road bed to detect a heavy object that lingers too long. When that happens, a signal is relayed to an oncoming train.

In 2007, the FRA found that the system worked as designed, “yield[ing] a high level of safety to motor vehicle users of the system without negatively impacting rail operations.”

But the report’s prediction that the system will be “a valuable treatment option for high-speed rail corridors throughout the United States” hasn’t come true. Arnold, in fact, said she hadn’t heard of the technology until The Post asked about it.

The system is expensive: $1.2 million to $1.5 million per installation, inventor Stephen R. Szegedy said in 2011. For Tri-Rail’s 72 rail crossings (shared by Amtrak and CSX), that would be $86 million to $105 million.

But America doesn’t put that kind of money into railroads. Right now, U.S. railroads are struggling to meet a federal law — unfunded — to install another set of high-tech safety features called Positive Train Control (PTC) by Dec. 31, 2018, a deadline that was pushed back three years under heavy lobbying by the rail industry.

Freight and commuter railroads estimate they’ll need $14.7 billion for the improvements. Tri-Rail has $5 million in hand for the $21 million it needs to equip its locomotives, Arnold said. Other area railroads, including the coming Brightline high-speed Miami-to-Orlando trains, will also be equipped with PTC.

PTC is vitally needed. It’s a GPS-based, automatic braking system that would have prevented the derailment last May of an Amtrak train that flew off the tracks at a curve in Philadelphia, killing eight and injuring 200. And while the system will do many crucial things, such as prevent train-on-train collisions, it won’t detect the presence of a stalled garbage truck — or your family’s SUV — on the tracks.

Why not add a smart crossing feature to the PTC system’s bag of tricks? We urge the rail world’s tech wizards to look into it now, while the investment can be folded into the larger cost of the PTC implementation. Hundreds of lives a year would be saved if they did.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
The Times Picayune (LA) - Amtrak train hits truck in Kenner Thursday afternoon
January 7, 2016
Michelle Hunter

An Amtrak train headed for New Orleans hit a truck in Kenner Thursday afternoon (Jan. 7) when the driver tried to race across the tracks, according to authorities.

The crash occurred about 2:18 p.m.  near the intersection of Hanson Place and Kenner Avenue not far from Louis Armstrong International Airport, according to Sgt. Shaun Watson, spokesman for the Kenner Police Department.

The City of New Orleans train was inbound from Chicago when a the driver of a "plumbing-style" truck tried to beat the train, Watson said.

The City of New Orleans hit the back end of the truck. They driver, however, did not suffer any injuries.

Two train passengers and an engineer complained of minor injuries, according to police. They were taken to a local hospital as a precaution.

The collision delayed the train's arrival for just over an hour before it continued on to New Orleans, Amtrak Spokesman Marc Magliari said.

Kenner police will cite the truck driver with failure to yield to a train and driving with no license, Watson said. 

**This story has been changed to reflect the correct spelling of Amtrak Spokesman Marc Magliari's name.

ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
Home
TC Palm (FL) - All Aboard Florida receives 1-year extension to sell $1.75 billion of tax-free bonds
January 7, 2016
Lisa Broadt

All Aboard Florida has another year to sell $1.75 billion of tax-exempt bonds, the railroad confirmed Thursday.

The extension — to Jan. 1, 2017 — is the second for All Aboard Florida, the company behind Brightline, the Miami-to-Orlando rail service that is to begin operations in 2017.

The U.S. Department of Transportation — the government agency that oversees private activity bonds — previously extended the $3 billion railroad’s original July 1 deadline by six months.

A “tough bond market” and investors who “lack the appetite” for a large issuance of unrated, or high-risk, bonds, are among the challenges All Aboard Florida could face in the coming year, according to local experts.

All Aboard Florida on Thursday said it will use the time to work out its financial plan.

“The extension provides us with necessary flexibility to pursue the most appropriate structure for the long-term financing of our business,” said Melissa Shuffield, All Aboard Florida spokeswoman. “We are under construction at each of our stations and remain committed to beginning Brightline service in 2017.”

When All Aboard Florida received approval in August to sell the bonds, the company said it could complete the transaction “within days.” But in mid-November it delayed a planned auction of its high-risk bonds, and in December confirmed it was seeking a deadline extension.

The company has not announced a new bond sales date.

All Aboard Florida over the last two years has come under fire from Martin and Indian River counties and Treasure Coast activists, who say the bonds were improperly authorized and have taken legal action to stop the project.

Brent Hanlon, treasurer of All Aboard Florida opposition group CARE FL, on Thursday hailed the delay as proof the project is doomed.

“AAF has twice had to ask for an extension from the U.S. DOT. The financial press indicates AAF is having a very difficult time selling tax-exempt and taxpayer-subsidized bonds to the investment community,” Hanlon said in an email. “This need for yet another extension reflects the project’s perceived weakness where it counts most, in the investment community. And U.S. DOT remains AAF’s benefactor.”

Meanwhile, All Aboard Florida’s request for a $1.6 billion Federal Railroad Administration loan remains on hold.

The loan, All Aboard Florida’s original financing plan, was relegated to second-line funding in August 2014 when the company applied for the bonds.

Construction of the passenger railroad already has begun between Miami and West Palm Beach, and service there is to begin in early 2017, with full service beginning in late 2017.

Palm Beach Post (FL) - All Aboard Florida receives 2nd bond extension
January 7, 2016
Jennifer Sorentrue

All Aboard Florida will get another year to sell $1.75 billion in tax-exempt bonds it plans to use to help pay for its proposed passenger train service connecting South Florida to Orlando.

The U.S. Department of Transportation has given the Coral Gables-based company until Jan. 1 to complete the bond issue. It marks the second time All Aboard Florida has received an extension.

AllAboardFlorida won preliminary approval from the Department of Transportation in December 2014 to issue the privateactivitybonds. The company was initially given until July 1 to complete the sale. In May, AllAboard announced it was seeking an extension of the July 1 deadline, and the company ultimately was given until Jan. 1 of this year to finalize the sale.

All Aboard asked for a second extension late last year. The company had planned to sell the bonds in 2015, but the tight municipal bond market forced the officials to shelve the sale.

“The extension provides us with necessary flexibility to pursue the most appropriate structure for the long-term financing of our business,” said Melissa Shuffield, a spokeswoman for All Aboard Florida. “We are under construction at each of our stations and remain committed to beginning Brightline service in 2017.”

The Florida Development Finance Corp., a special financing unit authorized by the state Legislature to issue tax-exempt bonds to private entities, signed off on the sale in August. Under the plan, the finance corporation would act as conduit issuer of the bonds, which will be sold by All Aboard Florida to private investors.

According to documents filed with the finance corporation, the 30-year bonds would not be rated and would be sold only to accredited investors and qualified institutional buyers.

.

AllAboardFlorida’sBrightline rail service plans to run 32 trains a day along the Florida East Coast Railway tracks with stops in Miami, Fort Lauderdale, West Palm Beach and Orlando.

Construction is underway on the company’s four stations in Miami, Ft. Lauderdale, West Palm Beach and Orlando, and crews in South Florida have begun work needed to add a second track to the Florida East Coast Railway line.

The company plans to launch service between Miami and West Palm Beach in 2017. The West Palm Beach-to-Orlando span is expected to begin by the end of 2017.

Martin and Indian River counties filed federal lawsuits last year against the U.S. Department of Transportation, challenging whether All Aboard Florida is eligible for the private activity bonds. A judge in June denied the counties’ request for an injunction to block the bond sale, saying, in part, that the money was not a linchpin to finishing the passenger rail line. The suits are still pending.

In court documents filed in May as part of the lawsuits, All Aboard Florida President Mike Reininger said the passenger rail project would be completed with or without the tax-exempt bonds.

The bond are not “irreplaceable element of AAF’s business plan,” Reininger said in a declaration filed in federal court.

AMTRAK
Home
WAMU 88.5 - More Rides, Shorter Trips: Agency Offers 3 Plans To Improve Northeast Corridor
January 7, 2016
Martin Di Caro

Anyone who regularly rides Amtrak or any of the eight commuter railroads that share the tracks in the congested Northeast Corridor knows that high speeds and reliable service are not a given. Curved tracks wind their way through cities and towns, and bridges and tunnels creak after more than a century of use.

Traveling from D.C. to New York can take less than three hours on an express train, closer to three and a half hours if you choose the cheaper option — if you are lucky. The system is at or over capacity in many places, including choke points at the Hudson River crossings between New Jersey and New York.

Efforts to improve the Northeast Corridor will take many years and billions of dollars, but as of today the federal government is weighing its options: The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) is leading a study that includes three proposals up for public review, each with its own price tag and level of ambition.

The least ambitious plan would bring existing infrastructure into a state of good repair, shaving a little time off the typical D.C.-to-New York trip. The plan with the highest projected cost envisions a massive new project for intercity trains topping 200 miles per hour, slashing 90 minutes to two hours off the same trek.

All three proposals look to the future: the U.S. Department of Transportation estimates the population will grow by six million over the next 30 years within the eight states of the 450-mile Northeast Corridor.

“The corridor as it is today cannot accommodate that, and frankly neither can the highway or the aviation system. The question is how are we going to deal with it?” said Paul Nissenbaum, the FRA’s associate administrator for railroad policy and development.

It is the first environmental assessment of the corridor since 1978 when trips were a fraction of what they are now.

Each day 2,200 passenger trains and 70 freighters use the tracks between Washington and Boston, according to federal data. Amtrak’s higher-speed Acela and Northeast Regional trains carried more than 11 million passengers in fiscal 2014, a 21 percent increase over fiscal 2005.

Rail passengers are 70 percent of the combined air/rail market between New York and Washington, according to the FRA.

19th century infrastructure, 21st century transit system
“Many of the infrastructure elements we are dealing with here, from bridges and tunnels to the catenary system, the electrical system, the signaling system, are decades and decades old, if not more than a century,” said Nissenbaum in an interview at DOT headquarters in Southeast Washington.

“Those things have to be addressed. While we are doing that, there are some simple improvements to straighten curves, to add some track in targeted places, to improve platforms at stations to allow for quicker boarding – all of that gives us an opportunity to make some near-term improvements,” he added.

Amtrak’s trains are capable of traveling about twice as fast as their average speed in the Northeast Corridor, which is only 80 miles per hour due to the many curves and speed restrictions. But just straightening out the tracks and replacing obsolete infrastructure — a seemingly relatively simple order — faces difficulties.

Bringing the Northeast Corridor into a state of good repair, the FRA’s “Alternative 1” in the study, would cost $65 billion. It involves environmental impacts “with the addition of two segments in Connecticut and Rhode Island outside of the existing NEC right-of-way, including impacts on land cover, water resources, ecological resources, prime farmlands, and prime timberlands,” according to a study summary.

For its relatively low cost, Alternative 1 could significantly increase the level of rail service and provide modest time-savings. FRA estimates an annual increase of about 70 million regional and intercity trips under this proposal.

Alternatives 2 and 3 have estimated costs of $135 billion and $290 billion, respectively. They call for significantly shortening time travel time between major cities, but their projected ridership increases don’t jump off the page. For instance, Alternative 3 with its $290 billion price tag would accommodate only five million more intercity trips annually than Alternative 1, priced at $65 billion.

Given the fiscal constraints of the current political climate, are such ambitious proposals realistic?

“I think what is realistic is to eliminate some of those key choke points and bring the average speed up from what it is today,” Nissenbaum said. “Going through Baltimore, you go through a tunnel well over 100 years old where you slow down to 30 and sometimes 10 to 15 miles per hour.”

Alternative 3 also would impact the “built and natural environment along the entire length of the additional spine between Washington and Boston,” according to the FRA.

'Cost and legal implications'
Paul Lewis, a transportation policy analyst at the Eno Center for Transportation, a Washington research group, believes even seemingly simple improvements — like straightening the tracks — will be difficult.

“Straightening out those turns and making the track able to handle higher speed trains might require taking of property, expanding tunnels, or doing other, very expensive infrastructure that has both cost and legal implications that can slow up the process,” he said.

“I think it is important to think big, but it is also important to be realistic. Some of the proposals being presented are in the hundreds of billions of dollars,” Lewis added.

The FRA currently is holding public meetings throughout the Northeast Corridor to gather feedback on its three proposals, and expects to make a decision later this year. But the agency is not only estimating the cost of the potential upgrades; officials say there is also a cost of doing nothing: less reliability, less service, and the same old infrastructure in a region rapidly adding more jobs and people.

Officials also note that any infrastructure improvements would assist not only Amtrak’s passengers. Commuter railroads, including MARC in Maryland and VRE in Virginia, would benefit, too.

USA Today - Justice IG: DEA paid Amtrak employees nearly $1 million as informants
January 7, 2016
Kevin Johnson

WASHINGTON — The Drug Enforcement Administration paid an Amtrak employee more than $850,000 during the past 20 years to serve as a confidential informant for the agency only to receive information that was always available to the DEA at no cost, an internal Justice Department review found.

The Amtrak employee, who was not identified in an investigative summary prepared by the Justice Department's inspector general, was being paid to assist a task force involving the DEA and Amtrak Police Department aimed at identifying contraband trafficking on the passenger train system.

A second Amtrak employee, assigned to a different task force, was paid a much lesser amount — $9,701 — again for information that was freely available to the DEA, the inspector general found.

Both arrangements, according to the inspector general, violated federal regulations and were regarded as "wasting substantial government funds.''

In addition, the investigation concluded that when DEA officials sought approval to register both Amtrak employees as informants in the "confidential source program," the required documents did not contain information that the informants would be paid.

DEA and Amtrak officials did not immediately respond to requests for comment Thursday.

In a separate finding, the inspector general concluded that the DEA registered a Transportation Security Administration screener in the confidential source program to provide information on passengers who might be carrying large sums of money, even though TSA employees would already be obligated to provide such information to law enforcement officers.

Although the inspector general found that the screener did not provide "any actionable information'' and was not paid by the DEA, the arrangement could have "violated individuals' protection against unreasonable searches and seizures'' had it led to DEA enforcement action.

In the end, the TSA informant was "deactivated for inability to provide any useful information.''

The findings disclosed Thursday come in the wake of the inspector general's stinging rebuke of the DEA's failure to provide proper oversight of some 240 confidential informants.

In a July report, the inspector general concluded that the DEA followed an ad-hoc informant management policy that did not abide by established Justice Department guidelines and exposed the government to "significant risk.''

For a year, ending last June 30, investigators found that the DEA paid more than $1 million in federal benefits to 17 informants or their dependents without proper government controls.

The Washington Times - DEA paid $850,000 for information Amtrak employee was obligated to share anyway
January 7, 2016
Andrea Noble

The Drug Enforcement Administration wasted more than $850,000 by paying an Amtrak employee for work as a confidential source when the federal employee was already obligated to share information with law enforcement, according to a report released Thursday by the Justice Department’s office of the inspector general.

Over the course of 20 years, the DEA made payments to the Amtrak employee in exchange for acting as a source and providing information to the agency. The arrangement netted the employee $854,460 as of January 2014 but was a “violation of federal regulations relating to the use of government property.”

According to the inspector general’s investigative summary, which does not go into detail about the arrangement or identify the employee involved, the Amtrak Police Department and the DEA participate in a joint task force that works to interdict passengers trafficking contraband on Amtrak trains.

Thus, the information provided through the confidential source should have all been available to the DEA at no cost. An arrangement allowing the employee to collect payments was “thereby wasting substantial government funds,” the report states.

As the inspector general’s office investigated this case, it also discovered a second arrangement between the DEA and an Amtrak employee in which the employee collected $9,701 in exchange for providing information as a confidential source. The inspector general’s report notes that documents registering that Amtrak employee as a confidential source did not contain information identifying the source as an Amtrak employee.

The office provided the reports to the DEA “for appropriate action,” but the investigative summaries do not indicate what action the agency took in these cases.

A DEA spokesman could not be reached immediately to discuss the cases.

In a second investigative summary released Thursday, the inspector general’s office also determined that the DEA had violated its own policy by registering a Transportation Security Administration security screener as a confidential informant.

The TSA employee was ultimately not paid any money for work as a confidential source because the employee did not provide any “actionable information” to the DEA.

The inspector general’s report indicates that the TSA security screener had been asked to notify the DEA of any passengers carrying large sums of money in exchange for a reward based on any money seized, a violation of the DEA’s interdiction policies.

As in the Amtrak case, the inspector general’s office indicates that the case was reported to the DEA for action but does not specify what, if any, disciplinary action was taken.

WWLTV (LA) - Amtrak says they can't accommodate woman and her wheelchair
January 7, 2016
Natalie Shepherd

NEW ORLEANS -- A woman confined to a wheelchair is having a though time getting home from her holiday trip to New Orleans.

Amtrak says flooding in the Midwest is interrupting regular train service, and it can't take Beatrice Alvarez and her wheelchair all the way to Minnesota.

She got to Union Passenger Terminal on Wednesday to take a train back to St. Paul, Minn., only to find out she couldn't board the train. She says Amtrak employees told her they couldn't accommodate her oversized wheelchair, even though her reservations had been made back in November by family members.

Family members borrowed a trailer to get Beatrice's wheelchair, all of their luggage and medical equipment to the train station. It's a trip that was supposed to happen last Saturday, but that's when Amtrak pushed her reservation back to today, because of flooding in the Midwest.

"I just assumed that they'd have a way to transport my chair a little ahead of me, or a little bit behind me," said Alvarez.

An Amtrak spokesperson says the wheelchair would fit on the train, but once the train gets to Memphis, passengers are being taken by bus to Carbondale, Ill., to avoid flooding. It wouldn't fit on the bus, an explanation disability advocates say doesn't cut it.

"Amtrak has the responsibility to transport people with disabilities as it would anyone else, which means it would be a reasonable expectation to get from point A to point B," said Lois Simpson, Advocacy Center executive director.

An Amtrak spokesperson says corporate relations has been in touch with Alvarez. He said the trains should be running continuously starting tomorrow. and she is scheduled to leave tomorrow afternoon.

WBUR (MA) - Amtrak CEO: ‘We Have A Safe Rail System’
January 7, 2016

Amtrak president and CEO Joseph Boardman says safety on the passenger rail system has improved since last May’s train derailment outside of Philadelphia that killed eight people. In this week’s View From The Top conversation, Boardman discusses improvements that have been made with Here & Now’s Jeremy Hobson.

Interview Highlights

On his seven years as CEO being the second-longest term in Amtrak history

“It’s a tough job, I guess. For one thing, you’ve got a board of directors here right at Amtrak, but then you’ve got 535 additional directors over on the hill. There’s been a lot of turmoil at Amtrak in the past.

On being a Republican serving under President Obama

“I’ve always seen this as not a political job. Transportation is not political. People use it. It really is about the people – whether it’s highways or whether it’s airways or whether it’s railroads, it’s moving people, and you really don’t care what their political aspiration is.”

On Amtrak safety when using tracks owned by other organizations

“The safety exists whether it’s with Metro North or whether it’s with Long Island Railroad or Amtrak. And I think that’s important for people to understand.”

On infrastructure

“If you’re just looking at the Northeast Corridor – and if you’re really just thinking about the infrastructure – it’s getting to be 100 years old, whether it’s tunnels or whether it’s some of our bridges. We have a new funding bill. We’re seeing very positive opportunities to make real improvement and real investment for the future in the specific infrastructure of the Northeast Corridor.”

On the future of Amtrak

“What I see for the future of Amtrak is a much more robust national network system. That’s where Amtrak really started. It started back in 1971 because the freight railroads, which were just plain railroads at that time, by the way, they had freight traffic and passenger traffic. At that point in time, they weren’t making any money on passenger rail – we’re not making money on passenger rail today either. So that’s a common issue around the world. I could think of myself as the mayor of Amtrak. The mayor of a pretty big city every day. With 84 or 85,000 people in the city. And we’re moving that many people every day up and down the corridor. We have to do that and provide food, drinking water, sewage, police service. We are a very different railroad than anybody else you could really think of. And the communities around where we operate really depend on us. They see it as absolutely necessary across the country. That’s something that Amtrak is going to continue to do in the future.”

On advice for the next Amtrak CEO

“Amtrak is changing a bit, in terms of it’s development and business acumen. There has to be a CEO who understands that, who sees the kinds of investments that are going to be necessary for the future, the different business models. That CEO can’t forget that the main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing. And that is to run these trains safely with good customer service and keep the national network together. It doesn’t work any other way, it needs to be connected.”

STATE BY STATE
Home
The Inquirer – Editorial:  Ready for a makeover
January 7, 2016

Transforming the lackluster 175 acres roughly bounded by the Schuykill and Walnut, Spring Garden, and 32d Streets into a new, pedestrian-friendly community with offices, an expanded Drexel University, and housing is not just smart; it is inspired.

The plan linking two of the city's most vibrant economic centers, University City and Center City, represents the kind of clear thinking that has been missing from past plans for the 30th Street Station area, among them covering the rail yard with a baseball stadium, convention center, or amusement park.

Separated by the river and Schuylkill Expressway, neighborhoods in the area are bursting with jobs and residents. Plans include adding three walkways across the Schuylkill and covering much of the unsightly rail yard with buildings and waterfront green spaces. One proposal also calls for more shops at 30th Street Station and a new transit center for long-distance buses and high-speed trains.

Some initial elements of the plan are already in the works, including a new Cira tower, but other ideas won't become reality until far into the future.

It makes sense not to rush the planning process, but the development partners, including Drexel University, SEPTA, Amtrak, Brandywine Realty Trust, and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, should try to get more elements of the project underway.

One early target could be to open an underground tunnel linking Amtrak trains and SEPTA's Market-Frankford Line. An underground interchange was closed in the 1980s, in part because of crime. But SEPTA is considering reopening the tunnel or at least making a better connection.

The transit authority should make the tunnel decision quickly. Commuters deserve a better experience than what they're getting from a configuration that sends them outside to battle traffic just to get to the dingy El station.

Right now, the Amtrak station, the old post office, and the Drexel and Cira buildings are islands in an otherwise gray limbo. The station's neighbor, the former home of the Bulletin newspaper, sits like a discarded box waiting for the recycling truck. The structure serves as a visible example of what should be avoided. In fact, it might be good to hide the building behind trees, vines, and shrubs.

Greenery and open spaces comparable to what exists around the train station could form an attractive gateway that unites neighborhoods and helps soak up all the gas fumes and soot from the buses, cars, and trains in the hub.

The development partners will need significant public funding and permits to pull off their plan, so they are seeking public input. One way to earn public support would be to show people how a revamped neighborhood would look.

The Star Press (IN) - City's quiet zone set to begin
January 7, 2016
Keith Roysdon

MUNCIE — Hear those train horns downtown?

Officials hope that, beginning Saturday, you won't. Or at least that the horns from trains passing through downtown won't be as noticeable.

After a delay in implementation, the city's downtown quiet zone will go into effect at the stroke of midnight at the end of the day Friday. The Federal Railroad Administration told The Star Press the effective date was Saturday and Mayor Dennis Tyler agreed as he updated the Muncie Redevelopment Commission on the project during a Thursday meeting.

The quiet zone — intended to lessen the noise from train horns downtown to benefit, in part, the new Courtyard hotel — has finally become a reality.

The city funded the quiet zone through $3.5 million in agreements with the Norfolk Southern and CSX railroad companies, whose tracks run through downtown's southern edge. The city issued $16 million in bonds for the quiet zone work and a new downtown parking garage.

A quiet zone has been talked about for more than a decade. By closing a half-dozen crossings to motor vehicle traffic and increasing crash-prevention features at that many more crossings, officials expect that trains won't sound their horns through much of the downtown area.

The physical alterations to the crossings that remain open, including Walnut and Liberty streets, include high concrete medians to keep motorists from trying to dodge around crossing safety gates, longer gates and signs that read "NO TRAIN HORN."

The city put up such signs in December, when work was completed, but delays in paperwork submitted to the Federal Railroad Administration meant that the signs had to be hidden or removed.

"We tried to bag them, but that didn't work," Campbell said about the signs, which were ultimately taken down by removing a few bolts that held them in place. "Friday we will put all of them up and it will be official."

The city had originally intended to have the quiet zone in place before the Courtyard opened in mid-December, but the processing of paperwork delayed its implementation


Hartford Courant (CT) - Shore Line East Will Send Trains To Hartford Line, Get New Fleet
January 7, 2016
Don Stacom

NEW HAVEN — The planned Hartford Line commuter rail service promises benefits for more than just the I-91 corridor: Transportation planners expect it to be a boost for Shore Line East.

The state plans to redeploy Shore Line East's worn fleet of diesel locomotives and passenger cars in 2018 to the Hartford Line. They'll be used as part of a high-frequency schedule of shuttle trips on the route between New Haven and Springfield, where there is no catenary to power electric trains.

For Shore Line East patrons, that means the prospect of getting a fresh ride. Once the diesels are on the Hartford Line, the state Department of Transportation intends to start serving Shore Line East with some of its modern, clean fleet of M-8 electric trains.

"The goal is to be running M-8s out to Old Saybrook," Carl Jackson, rail administrator with the DOT, told the Connecticut Public Transportation Commission on Thursday.

Jackson predicted the new trains will build ridership and improve on-time performance on Shore Line East, which celebrated its 25th year of service in June.

Gov. Dannel P. Malloy expanded Shore Line East service in 2013, and annual ridership now totals about 660,000. But the operation is plagued by the high expense of heavy rail service run under a contract with Amtrak, creating possibly the highest subsidy in the state's mass transportation system.

Fares in 2013 covered an anemic 7.1 percent of its operating costs, even worse than the 9.7 percent figure of 2009, according to figures from Jackson. By comparison, fares on the highly used New Haven Line covered about 72 percent of operating expenses in 2013, he reported.

Improving the so-called farebox ratio for Shore Line East "will be a heavy lift," but the new fleet should help, Jackson said. The most recent records available show only 90.7 percent of trains reached their final destinations within six minutes of schedule, he said.

"One reason is that the equipment is old," he said.

Improved on-time performance will encourage more people to use the train, and the M-8 fleet with clean bathrooms, fresh seats, winged headrests and power ports at every row will make the commute more pleasant, he said.

The M-8s are already running on the New Haven Line from Grand Central Terminal, but their trips end at New Haven's Union Station. For Shore Line East passengers using the New London, Old Saybrook, Westbrook, Clinton, Madison, Guilford and Branford stations, that means at least one change of trains on their trip to or from the city.

The DOT is testing M-8s on Shore Line East track to ensure they work seamlessly. The tracks east of New Haven are owned by Amtrak and use a different overhead propulsion system than the one used on the state-owned New Haven Line.

Jackson, who used to work at the Long Island Rail Road, said he could foresee running Old Saybrook-bound trains directly from Grand Central on summer Friday evenings. The Long Island Rail Road's Cannonball from Manhattan to Montauk is so popular that it sells reserved seats, he noted. The Cannonball also runs with high capacity on summer Sunday evenings in the other direction.

Malloy's administration doesn't want to stop rail service in New London. It has considered extending Metro-North-style service all the way to Westerly, R.I. Malloy's 30-year "Let's Go CT" transportation renewal plan recommends $200 million for that project but doesn't specify when it would be done.

Meanwhile, the state may refurbish some or all of the existing Shore Line East diesel fleet before assigning it to Hartford. It's also preparing to order replacements in the next few years, Jackson said.

Commissioner James Redeker has said he envisions buying new trains for the Waterbury and Danbury branch lines at the same time. All of those orders would probably be done in conjunction with Metro-North, the Long Island Rail Road and possibly other public transportation systems to reduce costs, Redeker said.



3


