 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 20, 2016
TV & RADIO
FRA Says “No Tolerance, No Patience”	2
Van Collides with Train	2
23 Year old Killed in Amtrak Crash	2
NATIONAL NEWS
Wall Street Journal - Regulators Tighten Enforcement of Rail-Safety Rules	2
Reuters - CP wants U.S. DOJ to look into talks held by U.S. railroads	3
Bloomberg Business - Canadian Pacific Seeks DOJ Review of `Campaign' Against Deal	4
Associated Press - Canadian Pacific wants investigation of merger opposition	5
RAIL INCIDENTS
Ventura County Star (CA) - Death of Oxnard bicyclist hit by train deemed accident	6
WUSA (DC) - Man dies after being hit by MARC train in NE DC	6
KESQ (CA) - Car versus train leaves one person dead in Mecca	6
METRO NORTH
Daily News (NY) - Metro-North and unions agree to set up hotline for workers to report 'close calls'	7
Times Herald Record - Metro-North, unions agree on safety reporting system	8
AMTRAK
The Hill - Clinton-Sanders battle puts spotlight on Amtrak gun rules	8
Asbury Park Press (NJ) - 220 mph train? 3 big changes imagined by Amtrak	9
Capital New York - Cuomo’s Penn Station plan already falling behind schedule	11
Northjersey.com - Money tops public's concerns over Northeast Corridor improvements	12
Railway Age - Will FAST Act bring fast results?	13


TV & RADIO
Home
FRA Says “No Tolerance, No Patience”
WGN - Chicago, IL

Van Collides with Train
WCTI-GRENC (ABC) - Greenville, NC

23 Year old Killed in Amtrak Crash
WTLV-JAX (NBC) - Jacksonville, FL

NATIONAL NEWS
Home
Wall Street Journal - Regulators Tighten Enforcement of Rail-Safety Rules
January 20, 2016
Andrew Tangel and Laura Stevens

Federal regulators are enforcing rail-safety rules more stringently, issuing more alleged violations against Amtrak and freight carriers amid worries over shipping crude oil and hazardous chemicals.

The Federal Railroad Administration leveled 6,485 violations carrying civil penalties against railroads in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, up 23% from the previous year, according to the agency’s annual enforcement report expected to be announced Wednesday.

The agency said it collected $15 million in civil penalties. The amount represents 75% of fines initially assessed, marking the highest such collection rate on record for the agency.

The railroad administration’s chief, Sarah Feinberg, said her agency had boosted inspector ranks and adopted a “no tolerance, no patience” policy for safety-rule violations on routes carrying passengers or shipments of crude oil and hazardous materials.

The agency has also been auditing railroads’ mechanical, track and other systems along such routes, which often wind through populated areas.

“Where we find violations, we’re writing them up,” Ms. Feinberg said in an interview. “That’s frequently more time-consuming, but it’s important for railroads to know that when we find violations, there will be consequences.”

An Amtrak spokeswoman said late Tuesday there weren’t any “consistent violations” and the railroad thoroughly reviews each one. She attributed Amtrak’s uptick in fiscal 2015 violations in part to issues such as improper reporting that didn’t affect safety. Amtrak’s 70 violations represent a fraction of the total.

A spokesman for the Association of American Railroads said safety has been improving over the past several decades, and railroads continue to take action to better safety including increased track inspections and implementing new technologies.

Union Pacific Corp. said safety is a primary focus, and last year it set safety records for both employees and safety-grade crossings. Norfolk Southern Corp. declined to comment. ? CSX Corp. and BNSF Railway Co. had no immediate comment late Tuesday.

FRA said the railroads hadn’t necessarily responded to the alleged violations noted in the enforcement report.

Crude-by-rail has become an increasingly important issue for the safety regulators and railroads due to a string of fiery derailments, including one in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec, that killed 47 people in 2013. But over the past year, the carloads of petroleum and petroleum products shipped by rail have fallen by nearly 10% as domestic drilling becomes less profitable with the declining price of oil.

Under Ms. Feinberg’s tenure, the agency has struck a tough note on safety. In May, the U.S. Transportation Department unveiled a stricter-than-expected rule on shipping crude by rail, including new tank-car standards and a requirement for new brakes on trains hauling more than 70 cars of hazardous flammable materials. The Transportation Department estimated the rule would cost the railroad industry $2.5 billion over 20 years, and save between $912 million and $2.9 billion due to fewer accidents. Railroads and other entities appealed the rule to the agency and were rebuffed.

Ms. Feinberg also flexed her muscles on the proposed $30 billion merger between Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. and Norfolk Southern Corp., telling The Wall Street Journal last week she expected to scrutinize “significant safety hurdles” to any merger between major freight railroads.

Challenges include combining safety cultures of two different organizations, including determining which company’s safety rules and protocols will take precedence and how to restructure a combined workforce to maintain the same level of communication and protection each had individually.

Canadian Pacific has said it would make Norfolk Southern safer. Of the Class I railroads cited by the agency, Canadian Pacific paid the least in fines, $639,000.

Reuters - CP wants U.S. DOJ to look into talks held by U.S. railroads
January 19, 2016
Nick Carey

Jan 19 Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd urged the U.S. Department of Justice to look into statements by U.S. railroad companies about "working closely with each other to block" the company's proposed takeover of Norfolk Southern Corp.

Canadian Pacific proposed $28 billion offer to buy Norfolk Southern, disclosed in mid-November, has been spurned multiple times, setting the stage for a proxy battle.

Executives from U.S. railroads including Union Pacific Corp , CSX Corp and BNSF, owned by Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc, told Reuters last week that Class I railroads had held limited discussions concerning the impact of a merger on the industry.

The executives stressed that any discussions they have are strictly limited by law to subjects that affect the industry.

"We're limited on what we can discuss, which is why we had inside lawyers, outside lawyers and outside lawyer consultants," BNSF chairman Matt Rose told Reuters last Thursday.

"It's being done thoughtfully and it's not secretive, it's not clandestine. We are there discussing what the potential public policy implications of this would be."

CP re-iterated in its letter to the DOJ released on Tuesday that there was minimal overlap between its and Norfolk's networks.

The company "ultimately concluded the unprecedented action of major competitors organizing to block a new entrant from enhancing competition to the U.S. merited the attention of the antitrust authorities," CP said in a statement accompanying the letter.

Bloomberg Business - Canadian Pacific Seeks DOJ Review of `Campaign' Against Deal
January 19, 2016
Thomas Black

Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. asked the U.S. Justice Department to look into a “collective campaign” by large railroads to block its hostile stock-and-cash bid for Norfolk Southern Corp.

The Canadian company said it sent a letter to inform the U.S. government of the “unprecedented action of major competitors organizing to block a new entrant from enhancing competition,” according to a statement Tuesday.
Railroads including Union Pacific Corp. and BNSF Railway Co. have voiced opposition to the combination, saying it would lead to a cascade of industry consolidation and could worsen rail traffic jams in Chicago. Norfolk Southern’s board twice has rejected proposals from Canadian Pacific, including one that valued the target at about $27 billion in mid-December.

Union Pacific communicated with fellow railroads for the purpose of petitioning the government, Aaron Hunt, a spokesman, said in an e-mail statement. “We oppose this merger and we are prepared to discuss our views with the government.”


Counsel Consulted
BNSF’s actions and comments have come after consulting with counsel and have been done according to the law, spokesman Mike Trevino said in a telephone interview. The Justice Department and CSX Corp. declined to comment.

U.S. lawmakers and rail customers have sent letters opposing the deal to the Surface Transportation Board, the regulator that approves combinations, even though a merger process hasn’t begun. The Teamsters Rail Conference, which represents more than 70,000 active railroad workers, said in a letter dated Monday that it opposes the merger because a combination could lead to job cuts.

Canadian Pacific, which operates in northern U.S. states including Illinois, Minnesota and North Dakota, said it’s confident the regulator will make an impartial analysis of any proposal and “is disappointed that others appear not to share such confidence and have resorted to collective action to ensure no merger occurs.”

Associated Press - Canadian Pacific wants investigation of merger opposition
January 19, 2016
Josh Funk

OMAHA, Neb. (AP) — Canadian Pacific railroad wants the Justice Department to investigate whether other major freight railroads are improperly coordinating opposition to its proposed acquisition of rival Norfolk Southern.

Canadian Pacific said Tuesday that it sent a letter to regulators asking them to investigate after executives from other major railroads said they had discussed the proposed deal.

Canadian Pacific said it believes that conversations between executives from Union Pacific, BNSF and CSX railroads may have violated antitrust rules, especially since Norfolk Southern has rejected all of its offers.

Union Pacific spokesman Aaron Hunt said the company's executives talked with other railroads to prepare to petition the government in opposition of any deal. BNSF spokesman Mike Trevino says railroad officials consulted lawyers before taking action to prepare for likely regulatory action related to a possible merger. CSX officials declined to comment.
Canadian Pacific has said combining its railroad with Norfolk Southern would create a more efficient operation that could haul more freight without adding new tracks. CP also predicts that it could cut roughly $1.8 billion in annual costs.

Norfolk Southern calls Canadian Pacific's roughly $30 billion offer inadequate, believes the railroad will fare better if it remains independent and doesn't think regulators would approve a major railroad merger.

Federal regulators haven't approved any major railroad mergers in more than 15 years since adopting tough restrictions on them in 2001. One of the only major deals in recent years is when Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway conglomerate bought BNSF railroad in 2010.

Canadian Pacific officials say they think the proposal could gain approval.

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Ventura County Star (CA) - Death of Oxnard bicyclist hit by train deemed accident
January 19, 2016

The death of an 18-year-old man hit by a train early Monday near Oxnard was deemed an accident, officials said Tuesday.

Lisandro Licea, of Oxnard, was walking north in the middle of the tracks with a bicycle when he was struck by a northbound train at 3 a.m. Monday, Union Pacific officials said. The incident occurred on the train bridge near the Santa Clara River between Ventura and Oxnard.

The 76-car oil train activated its emergency horn and brakes but could not stop in time to avoid the crash, officials said.

The Ventura County Medical Examiner's Office said Tuesday that Licea died of blunt-force trauma, and the death was ruled an accident.

WUSA (DC) - Man dies after being hit by MARC train in NE DC
January 19, 2016

WASHINGTON (WUSA9) -- A man died Tuesday evening after he was hit by a MARC train in Northeast D.C., a Metropolitan Police Department spokesperson said.

According to police, the train hit the man in the 2900 block of V Street NE.

Service was suspended on the Penn Line because of the accident, but has since resumed.
KESQ (CA) - Car versus train leaves one person dead in Mecca
January 19, 2016

A motorist was killed Tuesday in a collision with a freight train at a Mecca rail crossing.


The collision was reported at 5:40 p.m. on the railroad tracks near the intersection of Cleveland Street and Highway 111, according to the California Highway Patrol.

It wasn't immediately clear whether the vehicle had stalled on the tracks or attempted to beat the locomotive when the impact occurred.

According to the Riverside County Fire Department, two engine crews were
sent to the location, where personnel pronounced the motorist dead at the
scene.

The motorist's name was not immediately released. 

An investigation was underway.

METRO NORTH
Home
Daily News (NY) - Metro-North and unions agree to set up hotline for workers to report 'close calls'
January 19, 2016
Dan Rivoli

Metro-North and its unions agreed Tuesday to set up a hotline for workers to report “close calls” and unsafe conditions without fear of retribution.

The Confidential Close Call Reporting System — a partnership between federal agencies and rail operators — will let Metro North workers give confidential tips about those near-misses that go unreported due to unsafe conditions.

The deal was reached with the unions representing 4,000 mechanical and engineering workers, making Metro North the first commuter rail to offer this anonymous reporting system to all operation employees, according to the agency.

“This program confirms how much we depend on our employees to detect potential risks to our operations,” Metro-North President Joseph Giulietti said in a statement. “They are the eyes and ears of Metro-North and we appreciate their contribution to making the system run safely and efficiently.”

All complaints will be sent to a panel of local reps from the Federal Railroad Administration, Metro-North and its mechanical and engineering unions.

The Long Island Rail Road, and Amtrak already use a limited version of close-call reporting.

Times Herald Record - Metro-North, unions agree on safety reporting system
January 19, 2016

NEW YORK – Metro-North Railroad and unions representing its 4,000 engineering and mechanical employees agreed Tuesday to adopt an anonymous process for reporting safety concerns without fear of reprisal.

The railroad reached a similar agreement with 1,500 conductors, engineers and traffic controllers and their unions last year.

The Federal Railroad Administration directed Metro-North to implement the process, known as a confidential close call reporting system or C3RS, after concluding in a review of the railroad’s operations two years ago that it had “a deficit safety culture.”

The 60-day review followed the Dec. 1, 2013 derailment in the Bronx that left four people dead and spawned the fifth National Transportation Safety Board investigation of a derailment or fatality at Metro-North in six months.

Joseph Giulietti, who became Metro-North’s president in the midst of the review, said the agreement confirms how much the railroad depends on employees to detect potential risks.

The anonymous reports are vetted by an independent third party and then passed to a peer review team of FRA, Metro-North and union representatives for appropriate action. The FRA funds the program.

The C3RS agreement doesn’t extend to Metro-North’s operations in Orange and Rockland counties where it contracts with NJ Transit to provide service. However, NJ Transit was the first commuter railroad in the country to implement a C3RS, in 2009, following its participation in a pilot FRA program.

AMTRAK
Home
The Hill - Clinton-Sanders battle puts spotlight on Amtrak gun rules
January 19, 2016
Keith Laing

A vote to allow Amtrak passengers to carry guns in their checked luggage is the latest front in a fight over firearms between Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders as polls tighten in their race for the nomination. 

At Sunday night's debate, Clinton accused Sanders of voting "to let guns go onto the Amtrak," referencing a 2009 bill that allowed passengers to pack guns in their checked luggage for train trips. 

Sanders has countered that Clinton is being "very disingenuous" in attacking his votes on measures like the 2009 Amtrak gun bill. Clinton has for several weeks tried to put Sanders on the defensive over his record on gun control. 
The 2009 bill tied Amtrak's federal funding to the company allowing passengers to carry guns in their checked bags. The measure was included in a funding bill for the Department of Transportation and the Department of Housing and Urban Development that President Obama signed into law.

Sanders was one of 68 senators who voted for the amendment containing the Amtrak gun provisions, joined by 27 Democrats and 40 Republicans.

The Independent Vermont senator has said Clinton is smearing his record on guns to score political points. 

"I have a D-minus voting record from the NRA [National Rifle Association]," he said in Sunday's debate. "I was in 1988, there were three candidates running for Congress in the state of Vermont. I stood up to the gun lobby and came out and maintained the position that in this country, we should not be selling military-style assault weapons."

The Amtrak measure was one of several Clinton cited to argue Sanders isn't tough enough of gun control.

"He voted against the Brady Bill five times," Clinton said in the debate, referring to the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act.

"He voted for what we call the 'Charleston loophole,' " she continued. "He voted for immunity from gun-makers and sellers which the NRA said 'was the most important piece of gun legislation in 20 years.' He voted to let guns go onto the Amtrak, guns go into National Parks. He voted against doing research to figure out how we can save lives." 

Amtrak said it began allowing passengers to carry guns in their checked luggage on Dec. 15, 2010. The company requires passengers to notify it that they intend to pack firearms or ammunition at least 24 hours before their train trips. 

The company says in a post on its website that "passengers must travel on the same train that is transporting the checked firearms and/or ammunition.

Asbury Park Press (NJ) - 220 mph train? 3 big changes imagined by Amtrak
January 19, 2016
Mike Davis

NEWARK - The nation's most-traveled rail corridor could get a boost from high-speed trains and a robust network of stations, according to a lofty plan under review by the federal government.

Amtrak's 476-mile Northeast Corridor rail network is already in need of an upgrade, with about 750,000 passengers using the line each day, at or above capacity in certain areas. By 2040, the Federal Railroad Administration anticipates trains running over capacity by about 6,000 passengers per hour.

Enter the administration's "NEC Future program." At best, it's a decades-long list of improvements. At worst, it's a wish list of pipe dreams from imaginative transit gurus.

The FRA lists three "alternatives" to its current plan, each of which is more ambitious than the last. The administration is hosting a public hearing on the NEC Future program at the NJ Transit building in Newark. Riders can state their comments for the record from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m., and officials will make two presentations at 4:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. Written public comments can be submitted to comment@necfuture.com until Jan. 30.

What kind of changes could come to the Northeast Corridor? Here are the three biggest takeaways: 

1.) High-speed rail between Boston and Washington, up to 220 mph

Currently, the fastest Acela Express trains in Amtrak's fleet can travel at a top speed of 150 mph. As part of the administration's most conservative plan, top speeds would increase to 160 mph on certain parts of the corridor.

The most ambitious proposal calls for trains traveling 220 mph on the "second spine" of the corridor, from Stamford, CT, to Washington.  A full trip along the Northeast Corridor, from Boston to Washington, would be nearly three hours faster.

That's still only half the speed of maglev "bullet" trains in Japan, which travel at 374 mph.

2.) Train service to smaller airports 

Like NJ Transit, Amtrak makes regular stops at the Newark Liberty International Airport, where riders can transfer to the airport's monorail to all terminal and parking areas.

But as many budget-conscious travelers know: The cheapest fares are often at smaller out-of-state airports.

Under two of the NEC Future proposals, Amtrak would begin service to the Philadelphia International Airport, used by 30.7 million passengers in 2014. A traveler from northern New Jersey could ride Amtrak from Secaucus to the Philadelphia Airport without a single transfer.

On the northern part of the corridor, it would also provide service to the T.F. Green Airport in Providence, R.I.

3.) More stops on Amtrak = Less congestion everywhere

In their most ambitious proposal, rail officials envision a robust Amtrak network throughout the northeast. Of the 10 new stops proposed, most would be located in Long Island and Connecticut, including a crossing through the Long Island Sound. Others would include "downtown" stops in Philadelphia and Baltimore.

But the main goal of opening up such a network would be to alleviate congestion on all other modes of transportation. Depending on the proposal followed, about 69 million to 141 million more trips would shift from other modes to passenger rail.

Rail officials hope the smaller stops -- coupled with a new pricing structure -- would attract more commuters that would otherwise drive to work.

Capital New York - Cuomo’s Penn Station plan already falling behind schedule
January 19, 2016
Dana Rubinstein

Two weeks ago, Gov. Andrew Cuomo convened the press to announce that he would achieve what governors before him had not: a transformative renovation of the much-reviled Penn Station.

Even better, he would get it done quickly, issuing a “request for proposals” to developers that same week, with responses due in 90 days.

That timeline, in fact, was one of the very few concrete details contained in an announcement that was otherwise made up mostly of history lessons and pronouncements like “Government is not a soap box. Government is a vehicle of results and action.”

“The redevelopment of Penn Station will commence this week,” Cuomo said, during the event at Madison Square Garden. "We’re not going to waste any time. We’re going to do a joint solicitation—RFP/RFEI, for people who like acronyms—by Empire State, Amtrak and the MTA for the redevelopment of Penn by a private sector developer.”

But those solicitations have yet to be issued, as promised.

It’s not clear what the hold-up is.

The governor’s office referred questions to Empire State Development, which had no comment. Nor did Amtrak.

A subheadline in the press release accompanying the announcement read: “Solicitations Being Issued to Developers This Week, Due Back in 90 Days; Groundbreaking Targeted for This Year.”

"Lots of people are asking about this, and wondering where the plan is," emailed Maura Moynihan, the daughter of the late U.S. Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, whose vision for transforming the James A. Farley Post Office into a train hall is now central to Cuomo's own proposal. "Of course we are all desperate to see Penn Station raised from its current despicable condition which punishes every commuter who must brave The Pit — so we are hoping more news from Albany will be forthcoming!"

Northjersey.com - Money tops public's concerns over Northeast Corridor improvements
January 19, 2016
Christopher Maag

A quarter century from now, should the Northeast Corridor still be using the same crumbling tunnels and bridges it has today? Or should it have bullet trains travelling at 200 miles an hour, complete with a second set of tracks across New Jersey and new tunnel under Long Island Sound?

The Federal Rail Administration has spent the last four years considering both those options, plus a range of alternatives in between. But at a public hearing on that process held Tuesday night by the FRA at NJ Transit headquarters in Newark, a number of speakers including former governor James Florio encouraged the planners to consider one factor that so far has been left out: money.

“It’s interesting to be talking about all these options, and nobody’s talking about where the money will come from,” said Florio, who used to play a role in funding Amtrak and the Northeast Corridor as a member of Congress on the energy and commerce committee. “I know it is not officially part of your process here, but I suggest you create a second process to consider funding alternatives.”

Members of the public had a broad range of concerns at the meeting. Bicycle advocates encouraged federal planners to do more to encourage bikes on trains. Michael Scheffer, a train enthusiast from Caldwell, suggested tilting trains, which he said can handle curves at higher speeds. David Peter Alan, a pro-train advocate with the Lackawanna Coalition, asked the rail administration to officially include advocates like him in the planning process.

The only thing everyone agreed on, in fact, was the urgent need to find ways to pay for all the work the corridor needs. Many parts of the line, including the Portal Bridge across the Hackensack River and the tunnel under the Hudson River, are more than a century old and often fail.

“I think we have to go back to basics and talk about funding,” Alan said.

“These are wonderful options,” said Douglas Groff, 74, from Edison. “But if they can’t be funded, why, they’re just going to be gathering dust on shelves.”

The rail administration is considering four options. The cheapest would maintain the Northeast Corridor at its current level of service, with about 700,000 passengers a day. Another option would focus on eliminating major chokepoints, including construction of a second tunnel under the Hudson River.

Another possibility would build all-new sections of track, including sections across New Jersey and up to Hartford, Conn. The most expensive would build a second, parallel railroad all the way from Boston to Washington, D.C., capable of carrying 130 percent more passengers than the current system, according to the Federal Rail Administration.

The public comment period on all the different options ends Jan. 30. The administration plans to decide on a winning alternative this spring.

Railway Age - Will FAST Act bring fast results?
January 19, 2016
Carolina Worrell

After years of delays and extensions, a multi-year surface transportation bill is finally in place. Will it deliver on the advertised?

On Dec. 4, 2015, President Barack Obama signed the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act, a five-year federal transportation bill, into law. The FAST Act authorizes $305 billion in funding for federal surface transportation programs for fiscal year (FY) 2016 through FY 2020 and provides funding to improve highways, bridges and transit systems.

Rail provisions in the FAST Act promise to improve rail infrastructure and safety by “consolidating rail grant programs, cutting red tape and dedicating resources for best use. It also establishes a federal-state partnership to bring passenger rail assets into a state of good repair. Additionally, the bill will accelerate the delivery of rail projects by significantly reforming environmental and historic preservation review processes, and applying existing exemptions already used for highways to make critical rail investments go further.”

“The new bill includes several provisions that should be good for the U.S. transit industry and, therefore, for Wabtec,” says Richard Betler, Wabtec President and CEO. “For example, this is the first multi-year bill passed in a decade, and that means transit agencies should have a longer-term planning horizon for potential projects. In addition, the bill calls for a 10.2% funding increase in year one and further increases in future years. When coupled with our strong backlog of transit projects around the world, the new bill is another reason to be optimistic about Wabtec’s long-term growth opportunities in the transit market.”

Suppliers certainly have cause to celebrate as companies like Alstom Transport, Bombardier Transit Corp., Brookville Equipment, CAF USA, Kawasaki Railcar USA, Kinkisharyo, Siemens, and a new entry into the North American market, China’s CNR Changchun, are busy filling equipment orders for several public transportation agencies across the U.S., Canada and Mexico. The current passenger railcar backlog, according to information complied for Railway Age’s exclusive, annual “Passenger Railcar Market At A Glance” chart is a healthy 5,701 units worth an estimated $1.2 billion. Agencies like New York MTA, BART, WMATA, MBTA and the Toronto Transit Commission account for a sizeable chunk of the market.

Orders for more than 500 cars are expected to be placed this year by New Jersey Transit, which will soon release an RFP for 113 electric multiple-unit multi-level cars; Amtrak, which is in the midst of procuring trainsets to replace the Acela Express equipment on the Northeast Corridor; and WMATA, which continues to modernize its entire railcar fleet.

More impressive is the 2017-2021 five-year outlook. Transit agencies responding to the survey indicated they are contemplating placing orders for as many as 4,500 new and rebuilt vehicles.

In 2015, 971 cars were delivered to 24 agencies, the fourth-highest total in 10 years.

Railway Age asked Catherine Connor, Manager of Federal Government Affairs at WSP|Parsons Brinckerhoff, to comment on the passing of the FAST Act, how she thinks money will be allocated and what this means for the rail transit community. Connor is a registered lobbyist who has broad-based experience tracking the federal budget and appropriations process. She serves on numerous industry committees and coalitions that advance the cause of the transportation construction industry, actively engaging in public policy development in support of infrastructure investment. She works to develop industry consensus, and advocates those positions to Congress. Connor provided the following responses:

RA: How is money being allocated and from where is it coming?

Connor: 92% of the overall bill is funded through the Highway Trust Fund, which is funded through a combination of user fees, primarily the federal gas tax, and more recently through several large transfers of revenue from the general fund — approximately $70 billion in the FAST Act alone. The rail title (i.e. Amtrak funding) and transit capital improvement grants are funded directly from the general fund and not through the highway trust fund and therefore are dependent on annual appropriations.In most cases, funding is allocated by formula, but the FAST Act does create several new discretionary grant programs, such as a bus and bus facilities grant program, a nationally significant freight and highway projects grant program, and three small passenger rail grant programs.

RA: What is your general take on the FAST ACT and what does it mean to you and the rail transit community in terms of lease starts and upgrades, expansions to networks, etc.?

Connor: The FAST Act is a step in the right direction, and the five-year federal commitment will provide much-needed stability and certainty for transportation agencies. Armed with greater predictability and aided by a number of beneficial new programs particularly related to freight, multimodal projects and environmental streamlining/expedited project delivery, it is time to work in partnership with state and local governments to pick up the pace to create a safer, more effective and more resilient transportation network that meets the country’s growing needs. Access to jobs, greater mobility, improved safety and a more sustainable future are just a few of the benefits Americans will see as the FAST Act is implemented. The private sector can help achieve these objectives with innovative technologies, creative solutions, and by sharing project risk. However, the bill is only the first step—we have to keep up the momentum to identify a long-term funding solution.

RA: How do you think the FAST Act will benefit passenger rail?

Connor: For the first time, passenger rail programs are included in a federal surface transportation bill. This will help to put rail programs on equal footing with the traditional highway and transit programs. The funding levels in the FAST Act for Amtrak are not high as Amtrak and the rail industry had hoped, but they are an increase over the current levels. The rail title of the FAST bill authorizes the first funding for passenger rail (other than Amtrak) in several years. The new grant programs and separate Amtrak reform provisions indicate that rail improvements, especially on the Northeast Corridor, remain a Congressional priority. However, it is important to remember that passenger rail programs, including Amtrak, are dependent on annual appropriations. Funding is derived from the General Fund, not the Highway Trust Fund.





3


