 



TODAY’S FRONT PAGES
January 4, 2016
TV & RADIO
Washington State Hits Milestone for most Train Fatalities in 2015	2
Slow Track to Safety	2
Bridge Removed to Accommodate High Speed Rail	2
15 Injured in FL Train Derailment	2
7 Train Car Derailment in Attica	2
City Pushing to Expand Railroad Quiet Zone Proposal	2
RAIL INCIDENTS
Environment Guru - Asleep at the wheel	2
Associated Press - Man on tracks struck and killed by Amtrak train in Sumner	6
Wane.com (IN) - Train derailment in Attica closes highway	6
FAST ACT
Greenwich Time (CT) - Blumenthal: ‘A major step forward for rail safety’	7
AMTRAK
USA Today - Officials pushing to return passenger rail to Gulf Coast	8
Associated Press - Amtrak crash survivor hosts 3 rescuers at Giants-Eagles game	10
HIGH SPEED RAIL
The Fresno Bee (CA) - Arthur Koster: Millennials will ride high-speed rail	10
HHFT
The Olympian (WA) - Union Pacific could move 1 million gallons of oil through region weekly	11
STATE BY STATE
The Seattle Times - 2015 breaks 2-decade record of train-pedestrian deaths	12
The Washington Times - Minnesota rail inspector seeks to stop future accidents	15
WCTV (FL) - Railroad Service May Come back to Tallahassee	17


TV & RADIO
Home
Washington State Hits Milestone for most Train Fatalities in 2015
KIRO-SEA (CBS) - Seattle, WA

Slow Track to Safety
Al Jazeera America - U.S. Cable

Bridge Removed to Accommodate High Speed Rail
KGPE-FRES (CBS) - Fresno, CA

15 Injured in FL Train Derailment
KOMO-SEA (ABC) - Seattle, WA

7 Train Car Derailment in Attica
WLFI (CBS) - Lafayette, IN

City Pushing to Expand Railroad Quiet Zone Proposal
KSTP-MIN (ABC) - Minneapolis, MN

RAIL INCIDENTS
Home
Environment Guru - Asleep at the wheel
January 1, 2016

Three days after Thanksgiving in 2013, as a commuter train hurtled toward a sharp curve near the Harlem River in the Bronx, the engineer manning the controls fell asleep.

The train derailed at 82 mph. Four people died. And doctors later determined that the Metro-North Railroad engineer suffered from undiagnosed severe obstructive sleep apnea — a condition that health experts call a major cause of drowsiness during the day. Yet he had passed all his required medical exams.

The crash, one of a series of deadly train accidents over the past five years, received a huge amount of media attention and was seen as an eye opener about a major safety gap — the lack of any federal regulation requiring rail employees who play crucial roles in public safety to be screened for ailments that make it hard to stay alert.

But more than two years later, there’s still no such rule on the books.

In fact, unlike the trucking, bus, merchant marine and airline industries, the graying rail industry is the only mode of transportation in which regulators don’t require comprehensive medical examinations for operators. The Federal Railroad Administration requires vision and hearing tests every three years, but railroads can still certify engineers who flunk if they think the worker can safely operate a train anyway. And the FRA doesn’t require workers to disclose the prescription and over-the-counter medications they’re taking, although the agency “strongly” recommends it.

The agency has been pursuing a congressionally mandated effort to tighten its fatigue rules, but those efforts are three years late amid disputes among railroads, safety advocates and labor unions. Meanwhile, the National Transportation Safety Board says it has investigated eight rail accidents in the past 15 years, resulting in 12 deaths and 97 injuries, that have had some connection to employees’ medical conditions — including five in the past five years.

The FRA and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration — which regulates truckers and bus drivers — began a rule-making effort in October to identify and treat sleep disorders in operators. But that would still put any concrete federal action on conditions like sleep apnea years away.

The FRA is two months into the tenure of new chief Sarah Feinberg, who won Senate confirmation while promising a fresh focus on public safety. But the debate about medical requirements is just one of several safety issues facing the agency, including its efforts to regulate trains carrying flammable crude oil and a congressional mandate to install advanced anticollision systems — and Feinberg has only one more year on the job to make her mark.

“There’s new leadership at FRA, which I welcome, but the agency has been in the dark ages on safety,” said Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.), who has criticized the agency’s past oversight efforts. “Basically, it’s an issue of culture at that agency — culture and tradition — that it has failed to apply sufficient scrutiny and oversight.”
Feinberg expressed frustration with the government’s rule-making procedures well before she was confirmed in October. “No one is more frustrated by our regulatory process and how long it takes than I am on occasion,“ she told a House committee in April.

Blumenthal said he plans to push for action on medical standards and fatigue prevention in early 2016 if the agency doesn’t take “effective” steps on its own. Then again, Congress just let slip a major opportunity to address the issue in December, when it enacted a railroad reauthorization as part of a five-year highway and transit bill.

Medical fitness is a serious issue for railroad operators and other types of transportation workers who have long, irregular work schedules in sedentary conditions, safety consultant William C. Keppen said. “They have the same kind of work environment that truck drivers have,” he said, adding that studies have found that truckers have higher-than-average incidences of sleep disorders “because they eat what they can eat when they’re on the road. They’re not eating healthy food in many cases.”

But unlike truckers, bus drivers or airline pilots, railroad operators aren’t subject to federal rules requiring that they undergo regular physicals, report their medical diagnoses and provide a list of prescriptions they’re taking, said Mary Pat McKay, the NTSB’s chief medical officer.

“The scary thing is that a train engineer or conductor could be taking any medication — over-the-counter or prescribed — and have any medical problem, pick your poison, and is not required to report that … or have [that] evaluated or reviewed,” she said.

The FRA does require various types of mandatory drug and alcohol screening, and some railroads — including Amtrak — go beyond federal medical testing standards on their own. But the lack of standardization across a national industry has sometimes-deadly results. The exact number of engineers, conductors and yardmasters across freight and passenger lines who may be subject to railroad-specific medical standards is unclear. The Labor Department pegged the number of workers in those occupations at nearly 77,000 in 2014.

In one startling example, a Union Pacific engineer with a history of seizures blacked out and crashed his train hauling high-fructose corn syrup in August 2014 inside a Nevada warehouse. The same engineer had had an epileptic seizure at work in November 2008 but was back on the job less than five months later, after one of two neurologists who examined him cleared him to return to duty. In contrast, the agency that regulates interstate truckers and bus drivers recommends that anyone who suffers a seizure go at least 10 years without a relapse — and without taking seizure-related medication — before he or she can return to work.

The NTSB has yet to say whether it suspects that illness or fatigue played a role in last spring’s deadly Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia, in which eight people died and more than 200 were injured after a train hurtled into a curve at more than 100 mph.

The FRA’s attempt to update its health regulations has been slowed by the approach it has taken — trying to achieve consensus among railroads, labor organizations and physicians — rather than imposing a solution. So when those interests clash, the issue can get pushed to the back burner indefinitely.
“There’s a lot of work to be done in this area, and there’s not a lot of desire by people in the industry to even address it,” said one FRA official.

The agency has bucked the consensus approach in some other cases, such as efforts to set minimum sizes for train crews and require inward-facing cameras inside train cabs.

Another solution to health- and fatigue-related crashes is “positive train control,” an advanced anticollision and automatic braking technology that Congress ordered railroads to install in 2008. But lawmakers this year extended that deadline until at least 2018, which Blumenthal said makes it all the more urgent for the FRA to move faster on the medical front.

“There’s simply no reason to ignore medical fitness or fatigue simply because there is positive train control, which won’t be in operation anyway for years on many trains,” Blumenthal said. “But even with it, there’s still the obligation to put people who are aware and medically fit at the wheel of a multi-ton train for all kinds of reasons.”

The FRA is expected to complete rules in the next few months that would require passenger and freight railroads to create risk-reduction programs that account for fatigue and related medical conditions. Some freight railroads have pursued fatigue countermeasures on their own, but they wouldn’t have to have comprehensive plans ready until the agency finishes a rule outlining their requirements, which could take years.

Even then, the NTSB has said it does not expect the rule to deal with whether train operators are medically fit for duty, beyond the fatigue issue.

One dispute that has hampered the rule-writing process is whether railroads should have access to employees’ medical records. “In an industry that has a lot of distrust, that’s frowned on,” an FRA official said — and labor unions in particular object to it.

In contrast, McKay said, federal regulations require truckers and bus drivers, merchant marines and commercial airline pilots to submit to regular examinations by doctors who have been educated in safety-sensitive professions.

Some individual railroads go beyond the federal rules. Amtrak requires engineers to undergo annual physicals that stretch beyond vision and hearing tests — they must provide their medical histories and be seen by a licensed health care provider. They’re also subject to urine testing, a review of any medications they’re taking and a sleep apnea screening, a spokeswoman told POLITICO.

But industry and current and former government officials say labor representatives have opposed any effort that could strip workers of their jobs. Indeed, unions worry that further federal regulations could set off a process that imposes no limits on the information railroads can seek from employees, said John Risch, national legislative director at SMART, the country’s largest rail union.

“We should have some protections from invasion of our personal lives from the railroad industry,” he said. At the same time, he said, “We certainly have to be qualified and fit for duty to come to work.”
A medical condition like sleep apnea is just “one of the host of things” worsening fatigue in the rail industry, Risch said, which he argued is freight rail’s top safety issue. He said one important cause of fatigue is unpredictable work schedules.

On the medical side, the FRA has run into trouble justifying the costs of new regulations compared with their benefits, the agency official said. That’s because more comprehensive medical standards and positive train control would both reduce the same kinds of crashes — rail accidents attributable to human error.

“When we try to calculate the cost and benefits for different rules, the benefits have already been used up by positive train control,” he said.

Another complication is accounting for other rules on the horizon. For example, the agency is set to propose a rule that would probably require railroads to maintain at least a two-person crew. That would provide another layer of protection against accidents caused by incapacitated engineers, Risch said — and bring the rail industry more in line with airlines, which must have two pilots in the cockpit at all times.

But for now, the fate of the medical standards is blurry.

“I think we still have a long way to go, but we’re making progress on different elements of medical standards,” the FRA official said. “But it’s a long process, and we may not get everything we want the first time around.”

FRA spokesman Matthew Lehner was more optimistic, saying the agency “has worked aggressively during the last year to move rules on sleep apnea, fatigue and inward-facing cameras forward. And we will continue that progress and also look for other nonregulatory ways in 2016 to increase safety and reduce accidents caused by human error.”

Associated Press - Man on tracks struck and killed by Amtrak train in Sumner
January 2, 2016

SUMNER, Wash. (AP) - A railroad official says a 53-year-old man was struck and killed by an Amtrak train in Sumner on Saturday morning.

BNSF Railway spokesman Gus Melonas says they believe the man lived across the street from the rail yard.

The accident at 10:10 a.m. was expected to hold up traffic on the tracks, including the Amtrak passenger train traveling from Seattle to Portland, Oregon, for about three hours.

Sumner is about 29 miles south of Seattle.

Melonas says there were 27 train fatalities in Washington state in 2015. This was the first train accident of 2016.

This story corrects the day of the fatality as Saturday, not Sunday.

Wane.com (IN) - Train derailment in Attica closes highway
January 3, 2016

ATTICA, Ind. (WLFI) — A train derailed near McDonald’s in Attica closed U.S. Highway 41 around 11:30 p.m. Saturday night. Police said the road would be shut down for several hours and drivers should avoid the area.

According to a witness, the train was traveling to the town when they suddenly heard the train engage its breaks. That’s when Several train cars left the track and spilled its contents on top of vehicles owned by Basic Auto Sales.

According to Attica police, no injures were reported. No fuel leaks have been reported.

Officials said drivers can use North 500 E or County Road 200 W to get into near by Warren County.

FAST ACT
Home
Greenwich Time (CT) - Blumenthal: ‘A major step forward for rail safety’
January 1, 2016

Last month, Congress passed the FAST Act, the first major, long-term transportation bill in a decade, providing $3.5 billion for Connecticut’s roads and rails and ending a dangerously irresponsible era of patch and pray funding for our aging transportation system. While there is much to celebrate, the bill is far from perfect, rolling back some truck and rail safety provisions while also failing to address many urgent auto safety needs.

After years of kicking the can down our nation’s potholed roads with dozens of temporary and inadequate funding extensions, Congress has finally provided states the long-term certainty needed to begin necessary, major infrastructure investments. That work alone will create millions of jobs for construction workers across the country.

While the overall $305 billion, five-year investment is notable in contrast to the flat or declining funding seen across other areas of the federal government, it is merely a down payment toward what is urgently needed to address decades of deferred maintenance and crumbling infrastructure. Further, some of the funds come from tax collection practices I’ve criticized. We still need billions of dollars more to make real advances beyond just routine upkeep, and I will not rest in my advocacy for increased investment and for safety measures to protect all users of our transportation system.
Despite its flaws, this bill is a major step forward for rail safety and investment, incorporating many of the provisions I championed and authored following the cascading catastrophes that plagued Metro-North and Amtrak in recent years. Much work remains — this is not a mission accomplished moment — but these measures will undoubtedly save the lives of countless commuters and workers.

For the first time, passenger rail and rail safety are addressed in what has historically been solely a “highway” bill. It dedicates funding for Northeast Corridor rail distinct from the broader Amtrak network, a landmark recognition not only of the Corridor’s vital role in regional transportation, but its deteriorating and outdated infrastructure. It establishes the first ever national freight program, providing a vital lifeline to ports in Connecticut while reducing congestion on I-95.

It requires redundant signal protection — simple and inexpensive track safety measures that would have saved the life of West Haven railroad worker Robert Luden. It strengthens inspection practices on commuter railroads — steps that most likely could have prevented the 2013 Bridgeport derailment. It advances measures to limit speeds, helping to address the deadly speeding that caused the fatal Amtrak collision in Philadelphia and on Metro-North in Spuyten Duyvil. It overhauls how we treat grade-crossings, incorporating measures I authored and advocated for in the aftermath of the horrific crash in Valhalla last February. It requires cameras on commuter trains to ensure responsible performance by engineers, conductors and other employees, and alerters to detect dangerous conditions and circumstances before accidents occur. After decades of inaction, it provides funding to implement life-saving technology knowns as Positive Train Control — not nearly fast enough, but it is a historic first that should be acknowledged. Finally, it ensures victims of crashes on Amtrak receive adequate compensation for losses.

It is also notable what is not in this bill. We overcame sustained advocacy from the deep-pocketed trucking industry seeking to allow 18-year-old drivers behind the wheels of 80,000-pound big rig trucks, and seeking to override state laws to allow “deadly double” 33-foot-long trucks. These reckless provisions remain out of the bill.

Despite its strengths, the bill was a disappointing, lost opportunity to address record-breaking auto recalls and alarming auto safety problems. The bill increases safety fines for automakers from $35 million to $105 million — a drop in the bucket that accounts to little more than a rounding error for most manufacturers. While the bill will now require rental companies to repair recalled vehicles prior to rental — a provision I championed — it still does nothing to protect purchasers of used cars from dangerous defects subject to recall.

And despite holding firm on some of the deadliest and most troubling truck safety concerns, there are numerous giveaways to the trucking industry, granting certain groups the opportunity to drive longer, heavier trucks, and giving other industries exemptions to employ truckers without critical fatigue and rest rules.

Sadly, the bill weakens the 2018 deadline for Positive Train Control, making it more likely we will have to wait even longer to realize this critical technology’s benefits.

Every day, I hear from countless constituents across Connecticut who have lost hours and days of their lives snarled in traffic or standing on platforms, and worse, from those who have lost loved ones to preventable highway and rail tragedies. Overall, this bill is a powerful first step, and its overwhelming bipartisan passage is a testament to the collective agreement that more must be done to address our outdated, deteriorating transportation infrastructure. We must now build on this moment of consensus to finally create a modern, 21st century transportation system for all users.

 
AMTRAK
Home
USA Today - Officials pushing to return passenger rail to Gulf Coast
January 1, 2016
Karl Etters

TALLAHASSEE — A multistate rail agency is asking Amtrak to return passenger trains to the Gulf Coast a decade after it canceled service in wake of Hurricane Katrina.

A culture of Mardi Gras that extends beyond New Orleans, theme parks, riverboats, cruise ports, casinos, and professional and college sports teams along the rail route already are a huge draw for Gulf Coast visitors.

“Now all we need is the train,” said Tallahassee City Commissioner Scott Maddox, who sat on the Amtrak Mayor’s Advisory Council when he was mayor from 1996 to 2003.

An Amtrak report, prepared at the request of the Southern Rail Commission and released in December, looks at three possibilities for restoring rail service:

• A daily trip from New Orleans to Orlando with 16 stops along the way.

• An extension of the Chicago-to-New Orleans City of New Orleans line to include two daily trips to Mobile where passengers would change trains on their way to Florida.

• An overnight trip from New Orleans to Orlando.

Restored service could give riders access to the transcontinental Sunset Limited line that runs three days a week from New Orleans to Los Angeles, Silver Star lines that run up the Eastern Seaboard and other established lines.

The Amtrak report estimates that re-establishing a Gulf Coast line could produce an annual ridership of 38,000 for a ride from New Orleans to Mobile to nearly 154,000 annual passengers for round trip service to Orlando. The cost of a route ranges from $6.97 million to $14.4 million.

Money to pay for it — because Amtrak would have to lease the lines from freight-train operator CSX Transportation (CSX) — would come from local, state and federal sources. Amtrak, created by Congress in 1970, owns only the lines in its profitable Northeast corridor and uses subsidies from states in which it operates to fill the gap between revenue from passengers and federal funds.

"This isn't about nostalgia or rail fans," John Robert Smith told the (Mobile, Ala.) Press-Register in mid-2015. "It's about economic development and it's about commerce."

He's chairman of Transportation for America, a nonprofit alliance that advocates for solutions to transportation problems.

Mayors from almost two dozen cities along the route — including New Orleans; Biloxi, Miss.; Mobile, Ala.; Pensacola, Fla.; Tallahassee and Jacksonville — have written to Congress in support of returning passenger rail to their areas.

“The old service picked up around 2 a.m.,” Maddox said. He's hoping for a more tourist-friendly time.

Part of what Amtrak is looking at is whether cities that once had rail service are still equipped to handle an influx of passengers.

Maddox and former Tallahassee Mayor John Marks, who was a proponent of bringing the service back during his tenure, recently met with Amtrak. Leon County officials have taken on maintaining Tallahassee's station, installing a small-business incubator and other offices in the complex.

Redevelopment also has been happening around the station.

"They (Amtrak) were very optimistic,” Maddox said. “They were especially impressed with the redevelopment that had already occurred.”

Associated Press - Amtrak crash survivor hosts 3 rescuers at Giants-Eagles game
January 3, 2016

PHILADELPHIA (AP) — A survivor of a deadly Amtrak crash in Philadelphia is giving back to three police officers who carried him from the wreckage.

Nick Ritrivi has season tickets to see the New York Giants. So the three Philadelphia officers joined him Sunday as the Giants hosted the Philadelphia Eagles at the New Jersey Meadowlands.

WCAU-TV (http://goo.gl/LWVp2n) identifies the rescuers as Officers Dan Cosme, Tim Stephan and Clarence Manson.

Photographs show the officers carrying Ritrivi from the Amtrak crash last year and holding him again Sunday during a tailgate outside MetLife Stadium, where the Eagles beat the Giants 35-30.

Eight people died and more than 200 were injured when the speeding train derailed May 12.

HIGH SPEED RAIL
Home
The Fresno Bee (CA) - Arthur Koster: Millennials will ride high-speed rail
January 3, 2016
Arthur Koster

It is absurd for a state that prides itself on leadership and innovation to have such a heavy and vocal opposition to something that embodies those very principles – high-speed rail.

With an ever-teetering economy and an increasing population, our future as leaders and innovators depends on a varied, more efficient infrastructure for transportation that allows for an increased capacity for traveling and commuting. If we want to provide a foundation for a stable economy for the millennial generation and those after, we must invest in infrastructure projects that will provide just that.

Millennials are fast moving, and high-speed rail provides a transportation infrastructure to support that. The high-speed rail network would provide many benefits for millennials by offering faster travel and more job opportunities – both directly through the addition of high-speed rail jobs and the ability to commute to a wider variety of job markets, and indirectly through the increased job opportunities that will be seen with a thriving economy, for which high-speed rail can lay the foundation.

A person could easily live in Fresno and work in San Francisco or Los Angeles, which would not only stimulate the economy but also reduce the brain-drain phenomenon that plagues the Central Valley. The fast travel also would benefit college students by allowing them to arrive home for the holidays or summer break without the hassle of the airport or the risks associated with traveling in a car.

This $68 billion project will provide access to advanced technological job opportunities for millennials, allowing these Californians the ability to work with technologies that people in other countries have worked with for years, as well as allowing these young minds to help advance these technologies, making them better, safer, and more efficient.

Not only will that increase the value of this generation by providing experience to young engineers, builders and tradesmen, it will stimulate the local economies with immediate job growth for young professionals who might otherwise leave to find work elsewhere.

We all want the economy to grow, and we all want to see an expanded opportunity to realize the American Dream. California can accomplish just that, but we need to invest in the infrastructure that will allow future generations to move freely and efficiently.

High-speed rail is the foundation for the future of California and the entire country; we should utilize this opportunity, rather than squander it.

If we provide a basis for faster, more efficient travel, better job opportunities, and access to new technologies, we will lay the groundwork to allow the millennial populations to more fully leverage resources to assist in the growth of the economy.

We must remind ourselves that high-speed rail is not solely being built for us, but more so for the generations after us. If there is one thing that is for sure, #iwillride.

HHFT
Home
The Olympian (WA) - Union Pacific could move 1 million gallons of oil through region weekly
January 1, 2016

Trains operating on Union Pacific Railroad lines through Lewis and Thurston counties could be carrying 1 million gallons of Bakken crude oil weekly, according to a notification issued in early December and highlighted by Lewis County Emergency Management last week.

The rail line previously didn’t report transporting that much oil per train.

The notification by Union Pacific is required by a U.S. Department of Transportation emergency order. The order calls for rail lines to issue public notices in each state where it operates trains carrying 1 million gallons or more of oil from the Bakken oil fields in Montana and North Dakota.

According to its notification released Dec. 9, Union Pacific began running the trains in November.

Union Pacific lines expect no more than one train per week carrying 1 million gallons of oil or more to pass through Lewis and Thurston counties. Most trains are enroute to the Portland-Vancouver area.

Union Pacific issued a notification in June 2014, stating the company did not transport enough Bakken crude oil to meet the threshold at that time.

Burlington Northern Santa Fe’s last notification was released in September, stating it was transporting an estimated 10 to 18 trains carrying 1 million gallons or more of Bakken oil through Thurston and Lewis counties.

Lewis County Director of Emergency Management Steve Mansfield said many people are concerned about the crude oil traveling through the area, but that first responders prepare for any emergency incident that could occur.

“This is a huge threat for them, and that’s why we try to train and work together as much as possible,” Mansfield said.

If a significant derailment or oil train accident occurred that overwhelmed county resources, he said there are plans in place to include state and federal responders as well.

STATE BY STATE
Home
The Seattle Times - 2015 breaks 2-decade record of train-pedestrian deaths
December 31, 2015
Jessica Lee

Cale Tyler was on a three-mile “Beer Run” with the Tacoma Runners group in late November when he reportedly stepped around a railroad-crossing gate and was killed by a train.

Less than three weeks later, a 66-year-old Seattle man was fatally struck by a Sounder commuter train just north of Auburn.

And three days later, another man died in Auburn after an Amtrak train hit him, raising Washington’s train-pedestrian fatality total to 27 and topping the 20-year-annual record by two, according to BNSF spokesman Gus Melonas.

The number of such fatalities is troubling railroad officials, prompting new safety campaigns to steer people away from tracks and has led to a goal of zero accidents in 2016.

“It’s extremely rare for over 20,” Melonas said. “This [2015] has been a problematic year.”

Nationwide, Washington ranked ninth in train fatalities between January and September in 2015, the most recent period available, according to a clearinghouse for railroad data administered by the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA). California topped the list with 119 deaths, followed by Texas with 50 of the total 619 nationwide.

Trespassers, train technology — quieter locomotives can pose greater risk — and the number and frequency of trains can affect fatality rates.

“Our biggest problem in this state is trespassing,” said Bob Boston, state Utilities and Transportation Commission railroad-safety supervisor. “People don’t understand it takes a mile or more to stop — that’s the length of 18 football fields — for an average freight train.”

Weather can create problems for pedestrians, too, making it harder to hear approaching trains or lowering visibility with fog, Melonas said. And with 2015’s unusually warm summer in Washington, more people may have been out and about near tracks next to waterways, perhaps impacting the year’s high death total, he said.

Fourteen people died during last year’s warmer months, between March and September, according to the FRA data. One of them, 17-year-old Kristi Bartz, was killed on a trestle at a popular swimming area in Silvana, northwest of Marysville, in May. She’s among the youngest of that year’s fatalities.

Suicides accounted for about one-third of Washington’s train-pedestrian fatalities in 2015, a percentage that fluctuates year by year, Melonas said. The rest of such deaths occurred because of “external” factors, such as people not paying attention to their surroundings or accidentally walking on the railways.

“A train is committed to the tracks,” Boston said. “There’s only three things an engineer can do: apply the emergency brakes, blow the horn and pray.”

Tyler, 31, worked as an ultrasound technician with his wife, Jennifer Tyler, according to news reports and an obituary. The two were married a little more than 15 months when he died.

In addition to the 27 train-pedestrian fatalities, two motorists died in 2015 at railroad crossings, about the average annual number over the past decade.

And for nonfatal cases, the FRA reported 104 incidents in Washington before October that caused injuries ranging from minor bruises to critical amputations, a comparatively low number for the past 10 years.

It’s illegal to walk on or near tracks unless using a designated crossing area. Railroad police, sometimes in tandem with other law-enforcement agencies, issue trespassing citations that can include an average $500 fine, Melonas said.

Nearly all of 2015’s fatalities occurred on tracks operated by BNSF, which owns nearly half of Washington’s more than 3,000 miles of railroad lines, carrying Amtrak, Sound Transit and some Union Pacific locomotives.

Usually, Melonas said most years see about 16 or 17 train-pedestrian deaths in the state on average.

In light of 2015’s high total, the state chapter of Operation Lifesaver, a rail-safety nonprofit based in Olympia, is looking to grow its volunteer numbers and audience in Washington. Boston, the organization’s state coordinator, said the group is hoping to increase its safety presentations in schools and produce more video advertisements, for instance.

Recently, rail-safety advocates have been promoting messages to deter photographers from tracks. Boston said some like to shoot on what they think are abandoned tracks for wedding or senior photos, but the tracks turn out to be active. Railroad officials said they also are noticing more people taking selfies on or around tracks.

John Jeffrey Ray, 43, was posing for a photographer when an Amtrak train killed him in 2014. A musician for a show on the Las Vegas Strip, he was positioning himself so Mount Rainier showed in the picture, Boston said.

“They were so focused on what they were doing, they just didn’t hear the train,” he said. “Trains create an optical illusion; it’s impossible to tell how fast [a] train is going.”

Ron Pate, director of the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) rail division, said state officials hope to boost their work with the nonprofit to get the messages out. The transportation department also is working on new ways to improve safety with local jurisdictions and railroads, given that freight- and passenger-train speeds in many places are increasing.

Speeds for freight trains typically range between 10 and 60 mph, though Amtrak lines can travel in areas at 79 mph maximum speed, Melonas said.

BNSF added more than 1,100 new locomotives in the past three years, Melonas said, and additions will continue as the state’s population grows, along with demand. The railroad is constantly making upgrades, some of which include replacing loud steel-on-steel equipment with quieter materials, he said.

Among the improvements, rail systems nationwide are installing technology that is designed to slow trains that exceed safe speeds, or prevent trains from colliding, called Positive Train Control, or PTC. Washington has nearly completed installing its share of the new system, featuring signal towers to communicate with satellites, Melonas said. There’s no timeline for when the system will be operable, he said.

“Rail is going to grow, Amtrak is going to grow, passenger opportunities will grow,” he said. “The projections are that freight will grow out here, and so should awareness.”

The Washington Times - Minnesota rail inspector seeks to stop future accidents
January 2, 2016
Dan Gunderson

BUFFALO, Minn. (AP) - Rich McCumber drives a truck onto a rail crossing and lowers the small steel wheels onto the rails. Then it’s off down the track at about 20 miles per hour, his eyes straight ahead as he talks.

“This stretch of track I do three times a week,” he says as he searches for loose spikes, missing bolts, broken switches or anything else that could compromise the rails and potentially send a freight train crashing. “Three times a week over it. I learn my territory by heart.”

An inspector for Canadian Pacific, he’s responsible for 77 miles of mainline track in Minnesota, including this stretch in Wright County that, along with 8 miles of mainline siding, must be gone over three times a week - twice as federal rules require and once more per Canadian Pacific, Minnesota Public Radio News (http://bit.ly/1mmzf86 ) reported.

He tries to average 40 miles a day of mainline and must also keep watch over 13 additional lesser used tracks that are not inspected as often. It’s a daunting job, one that gets little attention but carries enormous weight in an era of high-volume oil train traffic and rising state and federal concern over rail safety.

Train derailments can turn deadly, especially if train cars are loaded with hazardous materials. A third of all derailments are caused by a problem with tracks. Small problems like loose spikes or tiny cracks in rails can lead to big accidents. Visual inspections of rails are the first line of defense against disaster.

Canadian Pacific has done 28,000 visual inspections so far in 2015 in Minnesota and found 7,000 problems, said Scott Paradise, the railroad’s chief engineer for track and structure, as he rode in the back seat of McCumber’s truck during the Wright County inspection.

“That’s 7,000 times we’re finding something that we can either protect through a slow order or correct through planned maintenance,” said Paradise, adding that CP’s maintenance spending - $46 million on track repairs in 2015 in Minnesota - is higher than at any time in his 20 years with the company.

A broken rail is often caused by a small flaw or crack inside the rail. It grows unseen over time until the rail splits apart under passing train wheels.

Those defects begin before they can be seen, so the inspection work also includes a special rail car equipped with ultrasonic gear to look for cracks in rail. Canadian Pacific performs six rail flaw inspections annually on its main track, more than what federal law calls for, Paradise said.

The railroad also uses a specially equipped train car to test track geometry several times a year. The car measures distance between rails, and rail alignment. Rails that are out of alignment cause increased wear and lead to rail failure.

Federal regulators, however, are pushing for railroads to scan rails for flaws every day using devices that could be fitted on every locomotive.

“We need to continuously collect data, we need to analyze and we need to do the trending so we can predict exactly how much life is in a rail and when it’s susceptible to breakage,” said Robert Lauby, chief safety officer with the Federal Railroad Administration.

That change will take time, but continuous monitoring is the way to reduce accidents caused by broken rails, he said.

Railroads are always working on techniques to make rail last longer, Paradise said as he walked a section of track explaining how carefully grinding the top of the rail keeps just enough wheel to rail contact.

“You want the tread of the wheel to be firmly on top of the rail,” he said. “We usually describe it as a dime, little bit larger than a dime. When you see a wear pattern like this it really is a preferable wear pattern.”

Reducing friction between rail and train wheels extends the life of the rail and saves fuel.

Canadian Pacific and other railroads also use lubricants on the rail in some areas to reduce friction. And the steel used in rails has improved. Despite rail cars getting heavier and traffic increasing, the average lifespan of rail has increased.

The Federal Railroad Administration, however, says broken rails remain a leading cause of accidents and that many defects that cause accidents aren’t being identified in time.

The FRA found a February oil train derailment and fire in West Virginia was caused by a broken rail. Investigators found the defect that cause the broken rail was missed by the railroad during two inspections.

The agency will push for increased training of inspectors who monitor rail scanning equipment and better use of software to compare inspection data over time and identify when a crack is growing, Lauby said.

The solution, he added, isn’t more regulation but higher expectations in the form of performance standards, “look at the results and hold them accountable for certain failure rates to make sure those are low and decreasing.”

Paradise says it’s a balancing act to keep freight flowing and the tracks safe, but he insists safety always comes first.

“We do get into some healthy debates at times about the appropriate time and scheduling of maintenance,” he said. “But I can tell you that there is nobody that would ever provide pressure internally to not take the appropriate action for a legitimate safety condition.”

WCTV (FL) - Railroad Service May Come back to Tallahassee
January 3, 2016

City officials tell us the Southern Rail Commission is working with Amtrak to see how to get the railroad service up and running again/
Tracks to Jacksonville and Orlando already exist and the tracks in New Orleans that were damaged from Hurricane Katrina have been restored. 
City officials say this vision could be become reality sooner than later.

"So we're hoping with a little bit of state department of transportation involvement, with Amtrak wanting to come back in the market and the southern rail commission looking at the entire route that we've got a chance to open up service from Tallahassee to New Orleans and perhaps Tallahassee to Jacksonville or even Orlando,” said City Commissioner Scott Maddox.

Commissioner Maddox also said he hopes within the next year, the plans for restored railroad service will be put into action.



3


